Gala Opening for extension to Qld Govt's DP centre  

  THE Premier of Queensland, Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen, didn't disappoint the 
crowd at the opening of the $20 million extension to the State Government 
Computer Centre in Brisbane last week.
  The Premier, who is facing a State election on November 1, was 
presented  with a tie-pin decorated with a microchip  containing 
more memory than the first computer the centre bought in 1965.  
  Never one to let an opportune moment slip by, Sir Joh reminded guests of 
the awesome power of high technology.
  "Now you know why I'm so afraid of the ID card that our beloved brethren in 
Canberra are so fond of," he said.
  Stages one and two of the State Government Computer Centre are worth $50 
million.  The stage two building cost $20 million and $30 million of computer 
equipment is installed in both sections. 
  The importance of the centre was demonstrated by the calibre of guests at 
the opening ceremony.
  Sir Joh, who officiated, was backed up by the Deputy Premier, Mr Bill Gunn, 
the Minister for Works and Housing, Mr Claude Wharton, the Minister for 
Industry, Small Business and Technology, Mr Mike Ahern, and the Under-
Treasurer, Mr Leo Hielscher.
  With four floors below ground level and two above, the centre is highly 
secure and only certain staff are permitted into "dark areas" where central 
processors are situated.
  Indeed, staff on one level underground have a large television screen 
relaying pictures from a camera focussed on street level to relieve the 
bunker-like atmosphere and let them know just what sort of a 
day it is outside.
  Alternative power systems have been built-in.  The centre has its own 
electricity sub-station and a diesel system for back-up.
  A computer maintenance system ensures 24-hour operation.
  The director of the State Government Computer Centre, Mr Mal Grierson, said 
the centre now has more than 200 times the processing capacity it had in 1965.
  "As well as supporting individual departmental applications, the centre's 
major responsibilities are the service-wide applications, for example, land 
information systems, government accounting, computer aided drafting, office 
automation and videotex," he said.
  "Research and strategic planning activities play a vital role in the 
centre's activities.
  "Technical developments within the industry are continually monitored and 
researched so as to assist departments to take advantage of current 
innovations.
  "Areas under investigation include resource planning, communications, new 
services such as graphics, electronic mail and videotex, data analysis and 
design support tools."
  According to Mr Gunn, Queensland's computer centre has set a lead for other 
States to follow.
  He had visited other States to assess their facilities and found none to 
match the Queensland venture, he said.

