Big foreign deal on the cards for Hartogen By JOSEPH DOWLING  

  Hartogen Energy Ltd is believed to be on the verge of announcing a 
multi-million dollar deal that may involve an overseas party taking a large 
slice of the company.  
  Market sources said Hartogen had been holding discussions with a number of 
overseas and local groups in recent months, although details have not been 
disclosed.
  They said Hartogen had scheduled a press conference yesterday to announce a 
major corporate development, but one of the parties involved (not Hartogen) 
had asked that the conference be delayed because of its proximity to the 
Queensland State election.
  Hartogen has been the subject of persistent takeover speculation in recent 
months, pushing the share price from $1.65 at August 1, to $2.70 yesterday.
  The speculation has generally linked Hartogen to the French Elf Aquitaine 
Triako group, with some suggestion that Elf Aquitaine may move to sell its
oil exploration interests in Australia to Hartogen.
  Hartogen, in return, would issue shares to Elf Aquitaine  Sources close to the companies yesterday denied that was the case, although 
they confirmed Elf Aquitaine had been holding discussions with a 
number of Australian companies, including Hartogen. 
  Elf Aquitaine Australia and New Zealand Ltd, which is 99 per cent
owned by the French parent company, Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine, earlier 
this year offloaded its 64.5 per cent interest in its mining arm, Elf Aquitaine
Triako Mines Ltd.
  That move was perceived as part of a general move to reduce spending in 
Australia, although the company is believed to be enthusiastic to retain some 
involvement in oil exploration.
  One analyst said last night that any link between Hartogen and Elf 
Aquitaine may simply involve a merging of exploration leases.
  Hartogen is believed to be close to completing plans for the listing of its 
shares on the Tokyo market, although company directors were not available 
yesterday to comment on any of the speculation.
  Likewise, Elf Aquitaine directors would not comment.

