<subsample>
	<id> A02d </id>
	


	<source> Australian Financial Review - 29 October 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Aust brokers have big hopes for New York </h>
	


	<bl> From MALCOLM MAIDEN in New York </bl>
	

  Several Australian broking houses in New York are expanding their operations 
significantly.
  The brokers are concentrating on developing bond dealing capacity in 
recognition of the emergence of a major US market for Australian bonds in 
the past year.
  But, the expansion also covers equity operations and demonstrates confidence 
on the part of the brokers about future US investor demand for Australian
paper.
  Bain and Co, J.B. Were and A.C. Goode are all chancing their arms against the 
bond trading might of the US investment houses which developed the Australian 
bond market in New York.
  Bain and Were are also expanding their equity dealing capacity, and the 
overdue entry of Melbourne's McCaughan Dyson is expected early in 1987.
  Goode's top New York man Mr Hugh Webb Ware said the developments reflected 
the fact that &quot;the US will be a major force in the Australian bond market for 
the foreseeable future&quot;.
  US investor interest in the Australian bond market surged during the final 
quarter of 1985.  The attitude of US investors towards Australian economic 
developments since then has had an important influence on the development of 
policy responses to the economic crisis.
  The initial wave of widely based US buying of Australian bonds, either 
directly or through retail vehicles such as the First Australia Prime Income 
Fund, was triggered by a wide yield spread between Australian and US 
government securities, and the belief that the $A was stable at about US70c.
  Today, the interest rate spread remains, but many US investors have been 
burned by the subsequent slide in the $A, now partially reversed.
  The drop in the dollar's value did not rout the US market, however, and 
Australian brokers claim that in the long term, US investors may prove more 
stable than Japanese houses.
  It is argued that the bond and equity investment is being led by 
institutions establishing core holdings offshore as part of the 
internationalisation of their portfolios.
  Bain's New York office is in the process of more than doubling its floor 
space as part of a major upgrade.  Bain currently fields two brokers in New 
York, two corporate advice executives and four support staff.
  In coming months, the broker will introduce a bond trader, two new equities 
dealers, one more corporate advice executive and additional support 
personnel.
  Bain has traditionally been a major player in the $A bond market but until 
now, the New York office has serviced US demand for Australian bonds in 
concert with its London office.  A similar system is employed by Westpac-Ord 
Minnett.
  Bain's London partner in charge of bonds Mr Graham Morton, will oversee the 
establishment of the New York bond dealing operation later this year and ease 
the first New York bond dealer, Mr Hal Heron, into the job.
  Were will boost its broking staff from three to five and establish a bond 
trading operation to be run by Mr John Clark, ex-London.
  The existing equities operation will be boosted by the addition of Mr Sam 
Brougham, currently trading in Melbourne, Mr Peter Wade and Mr Tom Hayward.
  Mr Wade worked for Were in New York from 1981 to 1984 then returned to the 
Melbourne office to manage Far Eastern activities.  He will be an 
institutional dealer in New York, while Mr Hayward will be an equity 
salesman.
  Goode has already set up a bond trading operation by bringing Mr Tom 
Larkworthy from Melbourne.
  Said Mr Jim Rayner of Were: &quot;We are a separate profit centre here, and
the expansion makes a statement about expected profitability.&quot;


</subsample>
