TAX REWARD FOR SUPER PEACE Cuts `carrot' to make unionists toe Federal line From PETER GIBSON, Political Reporter, in Canberra  

TAX cuts will be dangled before angry trade unions as a Federal Government
carrot to take the heat out of the superannuation war.
  Workers' leaders will be offered a $9 a week reduction in income tax
from September 1 in return for taking a softer approach.
  Government sources confirmed today that senior ministers believe it
essential to give militant unionists the extra incentive as soon as possible.
  The cuts would also probably strengthen the Government's argument for
a further discounting of the next national pay case, due early in 1987.
  So far Prime Minister Bob Hawke has given a commitment only to make the
cuts before the end of this year.
  But Cabinet, under enormous pressure to stop a breakout by big unions
from the ordered wage-fixing system, will be forced to decide the timing
of the cuts by early July.
  The first shot in the union struggle for wholesale national superannuation
- the issue rejected in yesterday's Arbitration Commission ruling - will
be fired next Monday.
  That is the day the ACTU wages campaign committee meets to plot tactics
for the next six months.
  Key unions in the building, transport, oil, maritime and metal industries
will make it clear that they intend to push for superannuation benefits
quickly.                        
  Smaller, weaker unions which do not have the muscle-power of the "big
boy" industries could wait up to two years to win the same benefits.
  ACTU president Simon Crean is heralding the superannuation battle as the
key to the future of the crucial Prices and Incomes Accord.
  He warned that if employers are not willing to negotiate schemes with
their workers, the Accord will crumble.
  And Tom McDonald, secretary of the Building Workers Industrial Union,
said employers must agree to the superannuation in the light of this year's
solitary pay rise of 2.3 per cent.
  And Metal Workers Union boss Greg Harrison today predicted widespread
industrial action over the next six months.
  Initial indications from employers were that action would be necessary
to win superannuation benefits, he said.
  Mr Harrison said the metals, transport, building and stevedoring industries
would be affected.                                         
  But Mr Hawke doesn't agree.
   He said today he was confident there would not be industrial trouble
over superannuation.
  The decision to allow individual negotiations for superannuation on an
industry-by-industry basis was excellent, he said.
 Yesterday's decision by the Arbitration Commission effectively said "no"
to ordering employers to pay into superannuation schemes.
  It ruled that bosses must genuinely agree to voluntary schemes, and it
also put a 3 per cent ceiling on contributions.
  The Commission is to call a conference of unions, employers and governments
to draw up guidelines for negotiating.     

