Drug pair `will still be hanged'   

  ONLY hours after the Malaysian Government had granted convicted drug 
runners Brian Chambers and Kevin Barlow a two-week stay of execution, 
Penang's top legal authority said the two men would still be hanged. 
  Penang's senior legal advisor Mr Shaari Yussof said last night he 
expected the two Australians would be executed, regardless of the
complex legal manoeuvres employed in a bid to save them. 
  Mr Shaari said the facts of the case remained that Malaysian courts had 
passed sentence and the Pardons Board had rejected pleas for clemency. 
  "A reprieve has not been granted and it is clear they will hang," 
Mr Shaari said.  "Under the due process of law the executions will be 
carried out." 
  Chambers' mother Mrs Sue Chambers said last night news of the stay of 
execution was "like the sun coming out". 
  "I've been holding my breath for so long about this.  It's nice to be able 
to get some oxygen," she said. 
  The mothers of both the men were visiting their sons in Pudu Jail 
yesterday morning when an Australian High Commission official told them
of the stay of execution. 
  "We all just stood there and grinned at one another," Mrs Chambers said. 
  "It is the only little bit of good news we have had since we have been 
here.  I suppose anything was an improvement on what the
position was before." 
  The Malaysian Government gave an assurance in the Penang
High Court yesterday that warrants for the execution of Chambers, 29, and
Barlow, 28, would not be issued while legal proceedings were under way to save
their lives. 
  Justice Edgar Joseph Jnr has fixed a hearing for July 4 when he
will further consider the arguments of Chambers' lawyer Mr Subash Shandran.
  Mr Shandran is arguing for an extended stay of execution pending a plea for
the Malaysian Supreme Court to re-hear Chambers' appeal, which the court
rejected last December. 
  Mr Subash Shandran is claiming an important trial procedure relied on by 
the trial judge is no longer applicable in Malaysia. 
  He is arguing that since 1981 the Supreme Court, in applying a Privy Council
decision on a Singapore case, had ruled the judge should hear both prosecution
and defence before a decision. 
  It was under these rules that Barlow and Chambers were tried.  But in 
March this year, three months after the rejection of the appeals, the 
Supreme Court said it was wrong in applying the Singapore
case. 
  Mr Subash Shandran also told the Judge the lawyers for the two
condemned men had not been officially told of the Pardons Board's rejection
of their clemency petitions and had only learned of them through press reports.
  Barlow and Chambers were sentenced to death in July last year. 

