Fears over 100-year-old rail bridge Engineers warn of big crack By Peter Grimshaw and Tracey Arthur  

  GRAVE fears were raised yesterday about the safety of a railway
bridge used every day by thousands of commuters travelling to and from the Blue
Mountains. 
  A civil engineer who inspected the bridge yesterday said it needed
urgent repairs otherwise it could "fail". 
  If that happened, a train could slide off the bridge and fall 30m into 
a canyon below. 
  A State Rail Authority spokesman said last night that repairs were under 
way at the viaduct over Knapsack Gully at Lapstone at the foot of the Blue 
Mountains. 
  He said trains were operating at a reduced speed over the bridge while 
maintenance work was completed. 
  "There is no danger to the public, otherwise we would not be running
trains," he said. 
  "This viaduct is over 100 years old and all the old bridges
and viaducts require repairs from time to time." 
  But the Opposition transport spokesman, Mr Bruce Baird, and the 
Liberal spokeswoman for the Blue Mountains, Mrs Margaret Bradshaw, said 
yesterday they feared the bridge was a safety hazard. 
  Mr Baird and Mrs Bradshaw visited the site yesterday with the civil
engineer and said there was a huge crack along the structure and many bricks
had fallen out. 
  "The technical experts say that unless something is done about
it, we could face a serious problem in the next six months," Mr Baird said.
  "Remember, this is the only rail access route to the Blue Mountains and there
is the question of all those passengers who use it every day to consider." 
  The civil engineer who inspected the bridge with Mr Baird said it was never
designed to take the heavy traffic and coal loads it carries today. 
  "If any heavy loads come down the hill and on to the bridge with any 
velocity, the bridge could fail," he said. 
  The engineer, who declined to be named for professional reasons, said the 
crack along the structure was big enough to put an adult's hand into. 
  He said that the top section of the bridge had moved several centimetres 
away from its normal position. 
  "Say you had two or three locomotives loaded with coal using the bridge at 
any great speed then the whole thing could move sideways," he said. 
  "If something is not done in the next six months the bridge could be 
enormously dangerous." 
  Mrs Bradshaw said: "There is no cause for immediate alarm but the bridge 
needs urgent work."

