<subsample>
	<id> A10a </id>
	


	<source> Sydney Morning Herald - 7 July 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Huddled masses yearning for kitsch </h>
	


	<bl> By DAVID DALE </bl>
	

  NEW YORK, Sunday: Five million Americans answered President Reagan's call 
to crowd into New York at the weekend and &quot;celebrate liberty&quot;. Most of them 
honoured the 100th birthday of the statue in the harbour by wearing green 
foam-rubber crowns, wandering round the streets holding beer cans, and 
singing the national anthem again and again.
  But some New Yorkers celebrated liberty in other ways: 
- Five thousand of the city's 11,000 taxi drivers went on strike for the 
weekend, complaining that they have not been allowed to raise their fares 
for six years. 
  A ride on a bus or subway became the embodiment of the phrase &quot;huddled 
masses, yearning to breathe free&quot;. Michael Higgins, president of the Taxi 
Owners Guild, said: &quot;We showed them.  They'll take us seriously now.&quot; 
- Italian and Polish organisations held protest meetings to complain that 
there were no Italians or Poles among the 12 &quot;ethnic Americans&quot; who received 
medals of honour from Mr Reagan (the list included Bob Hope and Henry 
Kissinger). 
  The ceremony was intended to honour the statue's symbolism of America 
opening its &quot;golden door&quot; to the oppressed masses of Europe, but the Mayor 
of New York, Ed Koch, labelled the selection of the 12 medal winners as 
&quot;idiotic&quot;. Mr Koch, who is up for re-election soon, held his own hastily 
organised counter-ceremony, in which he gave &quot;Liberty Awards&quot; to 86 
immigrants. 
  The next day, newspaper opinion polls showed 60 per cent of New
Yorkers believe America has accepted too many immigrants and should close its
golden door. 
- The Elvis Presley impersonators of America protested that the 200
Elvises appearing in the weekend's closing ceremony (along with the 500 banjo
pluckers, 300 tap dancers, and 500 marching girls) were not real Elvis
impersonators but simply dancers in black wigs who would mime to Elvis
recordings. 
  Their spokesman, a man named Lee Elvis, of East Flatbush, who has
been impersonating The King professionally for 16 years, said: &quot;They could have
done it with taste.  They could have had maybe the top 10 impersonators and done
it right.  But this - this is just a mockery.&quot; 
- About 500 homeless people held a 28 hour sit-in at Battery Park, the centre 
of festivities in lower Manhattan, protesting against the expenditure of $30 
million on the events of Liberty Weekend. 
- Close to 2,000 homosexuals marched through southern Manhattan in
protest against the US Supreme Court's ruling last week that homosexual acts
could be declared illegal.  They chanted &quot;Not the church, not the state, we
alone decide our fate&quot; and &quot;What do we want? Oral sex. When do we want it?
Now.&quot; 
  But they had failed to obtain a police permit to celebrate liberty in
this way.  When they reached Wall Street, which borders the area most crowded
with visitors, the marchers met a wall of helmeted police, holding clubs. They
turned back, and then several of them were attacked by people in the crowd.  Two
men were taken to hospital, and the protest march dispersed. 
- Human rights groups picketed the Esmeralda, Chile's entry in the Liberty 
Weekend festival of 22 tall ships, because it was used as a detention centre 
and torture chamber after the military coup in Chile in 1973. 
  The organisers of the weekend had refused to ban the Esmeralda from 
participating, saying they did not want to &quot;politicise&quot; the event. 
- Residents of Jersey City, which overlooks the Statue of Liberty from the 
other side of the harbour, demanded that Liza Minelli not be allowed to sing 
New York, New York at the weekend's closing ceremony, because Jersey City 
has more of a claim to the statue than New York, and anyway, the closing 
ceremony was being held in a stadium in New Jersey.  Liza Minelli sang
it anyway. 
- Members of an organisation called Jews For Jesus moved through the
crowds in southern Manhattan handing out a pamphlet which warned: &quot;Saving a
symbol isn't enough&quot;. &quot;Our economy, world politics and disintegrating personal
relationships may soon undo us. It cost God a bundle, but he was willing to pay
the price.  Yshua gave his life, his blood so that we could be healed.&quot; 
  But nearly everybody else had a great time, particularly the souvenir 
vendors.  On Saturday afternoon, Mervin Bendewald, running a stall near 
Battery Park, said: &quot;It's a madhouse.&quot;  His stall offered more than 100 
items ranging in price from $2 for an official liberty cigarette lighter to 
$295 for a two-metre green plexiglass replica of the statue. Mr Bendewald had 
only sold one plexiglass statue by Saturday afternoon, but he'd sold 200 
official Statue of Liberty shower curtains for $32 each, and was doing brisk 
business in Liberty pewter thimbles for $7, moulded plastic torches just like 
the one held by the statue for $12, and sunglasses with one lens coated with 
stars for $12. 
  Mr Bendewald was also offering the chance to have your photo taken with 
Lee Iacocca for $5, using a life-size cardboard cutout of Mr Iacocca, the 
chairman of the Liberty Restoration Fund.  Mr Iacocca, also chairman of 
Chrysler, is currently the most popular man in America, and he spent most of 
the weekend denying suggestions by television reporters that he should stand 
for president in 1988. 
  But Mr Bendewall's biggest seller by far was the green foam rubber crowns. 
On Friday alone he sold 3,000 of them at $3 each, in spite of the fact that 
nearby vendors had cut their prices to $2. 
  Mayor Koch offered this advice when asked about the commercialising of the 
Liberty weekend: &quot;Rush to the stores and buy all the kitsch you can because 
in 100 years you're going to make a fortune - that's the history of kitsch.&quot; 
  If the weekend proved anything, it proved that there is no limit to 
Americans' taste for excess.  You might have thought things had gone far 
enough when Jennifer Stewart, 28, of Iowa City, won the national Lady Liberty 
look-alike competition by painting herself green, and putting a broken 
laundry basket on her head. 
  But then the Carnegie Deli presented Mr Iacocca with a replica of the 
statue, made with 30 kilograms of chopped liver.  And an artist named Peter 
Rocha produced a metre-square mosaic of the statue in jellybeans. 
  As the weekend went on, it seemed perfectly normal to hear a television 
commentator filling in time before President Reagan arrived to switch on the 
laser lights for the statue in this way: 
&quot;You know, in addition to the sights and sounds we're bringing you here, 
there's something else I wish I could share with you.  There's a smell in the 
air here.  I can detect it.  It's the sweet smell of liberty.&quot; 
  The Liberty Weekend is over now, the millions have returned to their small 
towns all over America, and it might seem that nothing - certainly not 
Australia's Bicentennial celebrations - could ever top it for spectacle and 
excess. 
  But remember that planning is already under way here for the 500th 
anniversary of Christopher Columbus's discovery of America.  See you here in 
1992. 


</subsample>
