A renaissance man with a view of reality   

British actor Denholm Elliott is in heavy demand and the secret
of his success, he believes, is insecurity. 

 PAUL BYRNES reports.  

  AFTER a thespian career spanning 40 years and 75 films, Denholm Elliott 
remains prone to insecurity. 
  "I find that whenever anybody shakes my confidence, I'm no good," the 
64-year-old actor said last week from his home in London. 
  Whether this relates to his beginnings in drama is unclear, but that time 
was certainly traumatic.  He enrolled at the London's Royal Academy of 
Dramatic Art (RADA) in 1939, aged 17. 
  "I was very nervous and very insecure and had just left school
and all these young people were having mad affairs with each other and were
terribly grown up and sophisticated.  I felt completely out of place," he said.
  He was asked to leave after one term.  "They said I had no talent and was
wasting my money and their time and would I please just go away." 
  His revenge has been his success.  There is probably no other English 
character actor who is more constantly in demand at the moment, nor one whose 
work in small roles in the last 20 years is as consistently memorable. 
  You may remember him from Alfie, or King Rat, The Night They Raided 
Minskies, Brimstone and Treacle, Blade On The Feather (in which he was the 
sinister butler), Bad Timing, Trading Places (another butler), The Razor's 
Edge (as the foppish uncle) or A Private Function (the snobbish doctor).  
His latest role is in a marvellous adaptation of E.M. Forster's comic novel, 
A Room with a View, in which he plays Mr Emerson, a free-thinking English 
eccentric, and his performance is remarkably vivid. 
  "I have had a bit of a renaissance in the last few years," he agreed. "
I don't know if that's because everyone else is dead... I just seem to
have found a confidence and style that people seem to want. 
  "I feel very much at ease in front of the lens now, whereas I used to be 
very nervous.  I don't watch other actors at work much and I don't go to the 
theatre or cinema.  I'd rather play golf or tend my garden. 
  "I think if you are involved in each other's work all the time you tend to 
get over-exposed to each other.  You can see that in the way that Hollywood 
actors do a love scene. It's always the same." 
  And as for being insecure, he wouldn't be anything else. 
  "I don't know another actor I admire who isn't.  It is one's raison 
d'etre, the reason to do it, trying to find an identity and wanting 
approval.  Or something like that.
  "I think I will always be like that and I don't think if I wasn't I would be
any good. My observance of life would not be as sharp. 
  Elliot was born in 1922, the son of a barrister and grandson of a King's 
Counsel. His family lived then in Ealing, but later moved upmarket to the 
town of Malvern, which he didn't like any better. 
  After the disastrous debut at RADA, he joined the airforce and
was shot down over Europe.  His address for the next three years was Stalag
344, near Breslau, and that's where his acting career began. 
  "We had nothing else to do, so we built our own theatre.  The Germans, 
being very culture-conscious, allowed us to do plays for a while, until 
Hitler banned entertainment and we were put in chains. 
  "I started an underground theatre then in the huts, at night with 
clandestine sets and concealed lighting." 
  The Red Cross sent them scripts and the prisoners did plays like Arms and 
the Man, Pygmalion, Macbeth and The Philadelphia Story. 
  Back in England after the war, he joined the Amersham Repertory Company, 
then the Windsor Rep and was spotted by Laurence Olivier, who cast him in 
Venus Observed, and later as the lead in Ring Around The Moon on 
Broadway. 
  In the early 50s he had a film contract with Alexander Korda.  "He put me 
under contract and paid me and I sat on my arse for five years," he says now, 
which is not strictly true.  He appeared in movies like The Holly And The 
Ivy, Those Who Dare, The Heart Of the Matter and The Cruel Sea. 
  But his  career slowed down in the late 50s.
  "The `kitchen sink' with Osborne and all that lot was in, and I was not really
`kitchen sink' style, with my family background.  I didn't scratch my arse
enough or something. 
  "I do think people develop at different ages.  My career only really 
started in earnest in Station Six - Sahara, made in 1963.  I
think with Nothing But The Best, which followed that, I started to become a
character actor.
  He now prefers films to theatre, because of the freedom it allows. 

