Sport Paul Tait  

Martina Navratilova has been a fearsome competitor on the tennis court. 
Last week there was cause to fear the Wimbledon champion for another reason
when a pistol was detected in her luggage at San Francisco International
Airport. The pistol was confiscated, but Navratilova was not arrested and
no action was taken.  Airport officials said that she had a licence for the
gun in Texas but not in California and that she could petition San Mateo
County Court for its return.  All of that is fine, but it doesn't answer
the question of what the pistol was doing there in the first place.  Navratilova
said at the time it had been put there accidentally by a friend who was
helping her to pack.  Two days ago Navratilova admitted that she owned the
gun but was not aware that it was in her baggage.  She said she bought the
.38 calibre Smith and Wesson in 1984 after a string of murders in her Texas
neighbourhood.  "I'm glad that they ended up finding the gun," she said.
 "I would have been mortified to find out later that it was in my purse
and they didn't find it.  Then I really would be scared." 
  Boxing matches are strenuous events, and not only for those in the ring.
 On Tuesday Britain's Frank Bruno knocked out South African Gerrie Coetzee
after 110 seconds of the first round.  The South African, appropriately
from a place just outside Johannesburg called Boxburg, was sent through
the ropes by the force of Bruno's final blow.  Unconscious, the only thing
that prevented him from falling from the ring was a photographer, who
reportedly worked up quite a sweat in the 15 seconds he supported Coetzee
before aid arrived.
  Consumer affairs authorities are urging those who buy swimwear that becomes
transparent when wet to demand a refund or ask for an exchange.  The Consumer
Affairs Commissioner, Mr Philip Holt, said that such swimwear did not fit
the purpose of body covering.  He said consumers were protected under the
Trade Practices Law if they bought swimwear that was faulty or did not "suit"
its purpose.

