Archbishop defends opposition to Murphy service By Graham Downie  

  The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Canberra and Goulburn, the Most Reverend
Francis Carroll, admitted yesterday to being a "very unpopular gentleman"
because of his refusal to allow St Christopher's Cathedral to be used for
a public service for Justice Lionel Murphy.
  Archbishop Carroll said he had no objection to yesterday's thanksgiving
service for Justice Murphy at St Bede's Red Hill, but had strongly opposed
the use of St Christopher's.
  It would be almost an imposition on Lionel Murphy to inflict upon him
something that he never asked for in life," the Archbishop said.
  He had had no objection to a private request for a service of prayers
for Justice Murphy and his family, but had objected to a highly organised
service in which he had been expected to take part but had not been told
about.  He had also objected to any public advertisement of yesterday's
service.
  The church had previously been accused of body-snatching.  "I really felt
that he had the opportunity to ask for the church's ministry while alive,"
he said.  "Therefore it should not be either foisted on him or even given
to him when he is dead."
  Any person (even if baptised a Catholic, as Justice Murphy had been) who
had publicly repudiated a faith, could not "in conscience" be given a Christian
burial.  Not only would this be bad theology, it would have a certain         
impertinence about it.  
  Archbishop Carroll was asked if he had been unpopular with Justice Murphy's
family.  "Oh no, that was one of my problems," he replied.  "I wasn't dealing
with family... A fairly politically-minded person made the approach."
  Had a service at St Christopher's been advertised, the cathedral would
almost certainly have been filled, but he had not wanted the church to
be used for other purposes.
  He had not wanted a faith celebration for a man who had clearly repudiated
that faith, but was also concerned that the service would have been manipulated
and used for unworthy and political reasons.         

