Aquino readies for war with rebels By MARK FINEMAN of the `Los Angeles Times' Manila, 17 Nov. -  

The President of the Philippines, Corazon Aquino, declared yesterday that
she was "ready to lead the war" against the communist insurgency, as her
Government prepared to abandon efforts to negotiate a nationwide ceasefire
with leaders of the 17-year rebellion.
  A cabinet source said that the Government's two chief negotiators told
the President that their four months of peace talks with the rebels were
at a hopeless impasse, and they recommended that the time had come for
Mrs Aquino to pick up what she has called "the sword of war".
  At the same time, several military commanders said that the Philippines
armed forces had launched several regional offensives in the past week
aimed at strengthening the Government's position against the 23,000 armed
insurgents - either as a prelude to a ceasefire or as a contingency in
case the peace talks fail.
  Speaking at a world peace rally yesterday morning, Mrs Aquino said that
she still hoped that her negotiators could find a political solution to
the conflict, but her readiness to go to war came as the negotiators began
urging her to give up her national peace effort.
  They recommended that instead she pursue regional ceasefires with the
communists, while simultaneously turning loose her 200,000-strong military
forces in selected provinces where the insurgency has made its greatest
gains.
  The recommendation came after the rebels' political front group cancelled
a scheduled negotiating session with the Government on Friday.
  The National Democratic Front said the cancellation was triggered by
last week's ganglandstyle killing of a labor leader, Rolando Olalia, whose
union has been labelled a communist front by military leaders.
  Tension in Manila deepened at the weekend after the regional director
of Japan's third-largest corporation was kidnapped by five armed men while
driving home from a round of golf at a suburban country club.
  The Government released no details on the kidnapping, which was widely
viewed as a personal embarrassment for Mrs Aquino, who returned from a four-day
state visit to Japan 48 hours earlier.  She had guaranteed the Japanese
that her Government was stable and urged them to provide foreign aid and
investment to help the Philippines out of its worst economic crisis since
World War II.
  The murder, the kidnapping and the ensuing insecurity in the capital has
polarised the political forces of the left and right in Mrs Aquino's coalition
Government and presented her with what analysts call potentially the most
explosive crisis she has faced since assuming office last February.
  At Mr Olalia's wake on Friday night, a rebel negotiator, Satur Ocampo,
told reporters that the communist leadership was still willing to continue
the national ceasefire negotiations, and he cautioned Mrs Aquino "not to
fall into the trap" of right-wing elements in her Government who are trying
to "scuttle the ceasefire talks".
  The Defence Minister, Juan Ponce Enrile, has been openly critical of Mrs
Aquino's "path of peace" approach to solving the insurgency, a policy she
has said is needed to give her "the moral basis" to continue the war. 
The Defence Minister has called the peace talks "negotiations for war".
  The Government negotiators - both past advocates of peace -  are said
to be exhausted and frustrated by the negotiating sessions, which they
must attend without personal security and at secret locations chosen by
the rebels.
  The negotiators are now convinced that the rebels are merely trying
to manipulate the Government through the talks, sources said.

