POLICE fury on car-bomb scare By NEIL McMAHON  

Police were angry and disgusted over an elaborate eight-hour bomb scare
in Toorak Rd on Saturday.
  Assistant Commissioner (Operations), Mr John Frame, said if a stolen car
was planted near the site of last Sunday week's bombing as a hoax, the people
responsible were beneath contempt.
  "My feeling is one of disgust and anger," he said.
  "If it is an elaborate hoax then those responsible are below contempt.
  "The people of this area have been put through a very bad ordeal over
the past week and if it is a hoax they should be ashamed of themselves."
  Sen Det Stephen Keogh, of Prahran CIB, said the stolen car at the centre
of the scare had been finger-printed.
  He said he hoped this, with witnesses' accounts, would lead police to
the two men who stole the yellow Subaru coupe.
  The men told the owner on Saturday morning they wanted to take it for
a test drive.
  At about 12.15 pm the car was abandoned by one of the men near the corner
of Toorak and Punt Rds, only metres from the Turkish consulate building
destroyed in a bomb blast last Sunday week.
  Police took no chances with the car and cordoned off an area bounded by
Punt Rd, Darling St, Domain Rd and Alexandra St before bringing in the special
operation group and Army bomb experts.
  Residents, shoppers, and shopkeepers were evacuated.
  The car was declared safe just after 8pm.
  The Army robot fired three shots into the car but failed to detonate the
suspected bomb.
  An Army bomb disposal expert wearing protective clothing later placed
explosives on the bonnet and blew open the front of the car.
  Police then declared the car safe and the area was reopened within an
hour.
  Mr Peter Thatcher, 28, said the man who abandoned the car quickly ran
away.
  "He was driving along up toward Punt Rd and then he did a quick half
U-turn and the car was blocking both lanes of traffic," he said.
  "He got out of the car and walked to the front of it and fiddled with
it for a couple of seconds then turned and ran."
  Mr Thatcher described the man as aged about 35, 178 cm tall, of solid
build and European appearance.  He was wearing shorts, a T-shirt and thongs.

