Wire fence prospect to curb footy louts By STEHPEN MEESE and PETER SIMUNOVICH  

THE VFL might have to consider erecting wire barriers around football ovals
if violence became commonplace, the Sport and Recreation Minister, Mr
Trezise, said yesterday.
  Mr Trezise, commenting on Saturday's incident at Victoria Park, said
loutish behavior had to be stopped before it became uncontrollable.
  "We must nip in the bud any trend that could see Australian sports crowds
emulating the overseas situation, where on big sporting occasions special
police and army riot squads and equipment are needed," he said.
  Mr Trezise said he would discuss the incident, which resulted in the arrest
of six people, with the VFL commissioner, Mr Jack Hamilton, and the Police
and Emergency Services Minister, Mr Mathews, today.
  Mr Hamilton said yesterday the incident was "in the hands of the police
because no player was involved".
  "We are concerned about the crowd behavior, but the police will conduct
an investigation thoroughly and efficiently," he said.
  Asked if grounds would be barricaded to prevent any further violence
towards umpires, Mr Hamilton said: "Fortunately the incident is an isolated
one.
  "I think football crowds are wonderfully behaved, especially when you get
130,000 going to games week in and week out.
  "I don't think we should label our crowds on one incident.
  "Personally, I wouldn't like to see barbed wire around the grounds, but
we will have to monitor it.  If it happens frequently then we will have
to look at it."
  Mr Trezise said the Government shared the concern of the VFL and the 12
clubs on loutish behavior affecting innocent people and would help tackle
the problem at any time.
  He said incidents in which sports crowds were prepared to inflict violence
on umpires, players or officials simply because their team lost could not be
condoned. 
  More police might be needed at games to control outbreaks of violent
behavior.  
  "If violence became the norm, which I doubt, consideration would
have to be given to putting up wire barriers around the arena," he said. 
  Mr Trezise said he would regret seeing the installation of barriers to keep 
spectators off the ground.
  "I trust Saturday's occurrence was a rarity and merely a case of frustrated
barrackers getting carried away by the example of a few ringleaders," he
said.
- Melbourne psychologist Dr Francis Macnab said it was not uncommon for
people to behave violently when they thought they had been unjustly deprived
of victory.
  People also often behaved differently in a crowd to what they would
individually, he said.

