Brooklyn `fairy' packs a punch By BRUCE GUTHRIE in Los Angeles  

WHEN Mike Tyson was growing up in Brooklyn, the kids used to call him "little
fairy boy" because of his painfully shy, almost effeminate ways.
  But they daren't call him that now. 
  Tomorrow that "little fairy boy", now a massive fighting machine, is set
to rewrite the record books by becoming the youngest heavyweight boxing
champion in the history of the "sweet science".
  Tyson, 20, will fight 33-year-old Trevor Berbick for the World Boxing
Council heavyweight championship at the Las Vegas Hilton about 2.30 pm
(Melbourne time).
  Despite his youth and his challenger status, Tyson goes into the bout
a 5-1 favorite to thwart Berbick's first defence of the crown he won from
Pinklon Thomas in March.
  If, as many expect, Tyson takes the WBC title from Berbick, he will become
the youngest heavyweight champ.  That honor has long been held by Floyd
Patterson, who achieved it five weeks before his 22nd birthday back in 1956.
Tyson turned 20 on June 30.
  The story of Tyson's rise from impoverished child to delinquent youth
to championship contender is an inspiring tale.
  There is a view in boxing circles the sport is only as good as its
heavyweights.
  Given the paucity of class acts in the division, Tyson has been like a
breath of fresh air for the sport since he turned pro in March 1985.
  In the ring he looks and is frighteningly efficient.  There are no frills -
his standard attire is black trunks and black, ankle-length shoes.  He has
been aptly likened to a hungry doberman.
  Tyson, although short for a heavyweight - about 1.8 metres - has a body
like a tip-truck.
  Weighing in at 98 kg, his head, which in repose looks like a chunk of flesh,
devoid of features, sits atop a 50cm neck.  Most experts agree it will take
some punch to snap it back towards the canvas.
  Tyson grew up the youngest of three children in the Bedford-Stuyvesant
section of Brooklyn.  He says he never knew his father and that his mother
detested violence.
  Given her timid ways and that his earliest playmate was his sister and
not his older brother, Tyson says he picked up some almost effeminate
mannerisms.
  These brought some painful epithets from the tough kids of his neighborhood.
  "When I was younger, they used to call me `little fairy boy'," he said.
  "I was always gentle, really gentle."
  In time, Tyson learned to fight, especially when his mother, Lorna, moved
the family to the even tougher Brownsville area of Brooklyn.
  Tyson has said he was forever being robbed by neighborhood youths.  They'd
also beat him up for good measure.
  But even 10-year-olds have their breaking point - and for Tyson it was
when a tough tried to steal one of the pigeons he was raising near home.
  Tyson says he doesn't know what came over him but, almost effortlessly,
he beat the living daylights out of the older would-be thief.
  Soon, Tyson says, he was fighting constantly.  It was a way of being accepted
by a neighborhood that had been so hostile to him.
  He fell in with the wrong crowd and was caught up in a world of petty
and not-so-petty crime.
  Almost inevitably he found his way to a school for delinquent boys, the
Tryon School in New York.
  When he arrived at age 13 he had the reading capacity of a third-grader
and the attitude of a hardened criminal.
  He'd also broken his mother's heart.  "My mother used to ask me, `How can
you steal?  I never stole anything in my life.'
  "I know she was embarrassed, because she had a lot of pride.
  "I was haunted and I just didn't care.  I became so obnoxious."
  But the Tryon School wound up being Tyson's salvation for it was there
he met one-time amateur boxing champion Bobby Stewart, who was working
at the school as a counsellor/guard.
  Stewart worked with Tyson and soon saw the powerfully built kid's potential.
 At the same time, Tyson's other teachers at Tryon noticed a huge improvement
in their student.
  At first, because of his hostility and limited abilities they suspected
Tyson was retarded, but he made extraordinary progress.
  A former teacher, Robert Georgia, recalled:  "Boxing was what interested
Mike.  He used to go to bed here every night with his boxing gloves.
  "When he came here Mike was real down.  He was real quiet and mean.  Then
we saw a change in his personality - he came out of his shell."
  Boxing tutor Stewart acted on his hunch that he had a champion.
  He took Tyson, still only 13, to ageing trainer Cus D'Amato, who had trained
Patterson to his title more than two decades before.
  D'Amato and an assistant, Kevin Rooney, now a Tyson trainer, watched
as the manchild and Stewart sparred.
  "I said maybe this guy is lying about his age," Rooney said.
  "He was 13 but he had the body of a man.  He sparred with Bobby and Bobby
opened up on him.  But Bobby told us, `This kid can punch like hell'."
  Six years later professional fighters would say much the same thing after
being mauled by Tyson.
  Eddie Richardson, a heavyweight whom Tyson dispatched little more than
a minute into the first round of their fight last year, was asked immediately
after the bout if he'd ever been hit so hard.
  "Yeah," Richardson said.  "About a year ago, when I was hit by a truck."
  D'Amato recalled he told Tyson at the end of that first day in his ring
that if the boy behaved himself he'd teach him how to fight.
  "He (Tyson) didn't talk much then.  He was very silent; he didn't trust
anybody," D'Amato said.
  Twelve months on, the trainer became the 14-year-old Tyson's legal guardian.
No longer were they boxer and trainer - more father and son.
  Tyson moved to D'Amato's sprawling Catskill home and learned the gospel
of boxing, the 72-year-old man says.
  Tyson was a success as an amateur, but it is as a pro he has really made
his mark.
  When he steps into the ring at the Hilton tomorrow he will have fought
27 times professionally.  
  He has won 25 of those by knockout and the other two on 10-round decisions.
  Indeed, he was such a spectacular contender early on that within a year
of turning pro the giant ABC television network had signed him to a $850,000
four-fight contract.
  He still lives at D'Amato's home in New York, and still keeps pigeons.
  He has a girlfriend and knows he can earn more in the ring than he could
have earned by stealing.
  He often marvels at how far he has come in such a short time.  After all,
it was only seven years ago he was seemingly trapped on a short road to
crime and punishment.
  Still, although his life has been one of triumph over adversity, there
remains great sadness going into tomorrow's bout.
  Gone from his life are the two people who meant most to him, his mother
Lorna and D'Amato.  Mrs Tyson died of cancer in 1982; D'Amato from pneumonia
last November.
  Tyson makes no secret of the fact the two losses have left a great
hollowness in his young life.
  "I'm going to do well," he says matter-of-factly, "but when I come down
to it, who really cares?  I like doing my job, but I'm not happy being
victorious.
  "I fight my heart out and give it my best, but when it's over, there's
no Cus to tell me how I did, no mother to show my clippings to."

