Tribute to a riding legend Motorcycling  - Wayne Gregson  

KEN RUMBLE probably would have been embarrassed to hear what everyone has
been saying about him this past week or so.
  But those who knew him were trying to find words to describe his phenomenal
abilities on two-wheel machinery.
  Ken Rumble, 59, Australian motorcycle champion for many years, was buried
last week after succumbing to a wasting illness.
  His friend and on-track competitor Hughie Hoare said there would hardly
be a motorcycle club in the land which would fail to mark his passing.
  "I don't think there'll ever be another rider like him, or as good as
him," he said.
  "He was the best all-rounder Australia has seen.
  "He raced and won on almost any sort of bike in any sort of motorcycle
sport.
  "He even had a go at speedway, about one season if I remember correctly,
but he said he could never come to grips with that wooden fence.  He was
a great slider."
  Ken Rumble began his peculiar motorcycle racing career soon after World
War 2 and soon discovered he had an ability to go fast on virtually any
motorcycle.
  He performed the seemingly impossible one year by picking up all the
national scramble titles, 125cc, 250cc, 350cc and 500cc, on the famous 125cc
Walsh BSA Bantam.
  "In one meeting which comes to mind" Hughie Hoare said, "he reckoned he
was going to ride a road Manx Norton in a grass track meeting.  We all laughed
at that.  It was outrageous to ride a Manx on the grass.
  "I mean, this was a pucka road racing bike.
  "But he turned up and wheeled the thing off the trailer.  He'd put wide
bars on it, grass-track tyres, speedway type footpegs.  Sure enough, he
was going to give it a go against all the grass track JAPs.
  "He won all the races he entered."
  After hanging up his solo road-racing leathers, Ken Rumble decided to
race side-cars.
  His career ended only 10 years ago after a nasty side-car accident on
the old Hume Weir circuit in which he badly injured a leg.  He'd been racing
- and winning - for 30 years.
  "Young people who never saw Ken Rumble ride have really missed out on
something," Hughie said.
  "What made him so good, so long? I don't know.  There seemed to be nothing
he couldn't do.  Perhaps it was bred into him.  Who knows?
  "And you know, for all his success, he was a helluva nice guy as well."
  Someone once explained the difference between a good rider and a champion
rider as follows: "A good rider will win on a good bike.  A champion will
win on anything.
  In which case Ken Rumble more than qualified.
  AUSTRALIA's largest annual historic motorcycle meeting will be held at
Phillip Island on October 18-19.
  The meeting, which attracts more than 200 entries, some from overseas,
includes classic (pre-1963) post-classic (1963-1972), solo and sidecar racing.
  There will also be static displays of antique motorcycles, a vintage parade,
and a concourse d'elegance.  A restored 1957 Triumph will be raffled and
drawn on the Sunday.
  A TRIUMPH pageant will be held between 8 am and 1 pm on Saturday, October
25, as part of National Motorcycle Month.
  Motorcycles will gather in Elizabeth St between Lonsdale and LaTrobe
Sts and then a parade will take them through the streets to Albert Park
Lake.

