A Gully merger warning Soccer by Peter Desira  

GREEN GULLY should consider a merger before it disappears into oblivion,
according to George Cross president Alf Zahra.
  "Now that they have been relegated from the National League, it will take
a lot of hard work to get the club back on the rails in the next year,"
Zahra said yesterday.
  "You only have to look at clubs that never recovered once they took the
plunge - Mooroolbark is a prime example, sinking to the lower reaches of
the VSF once it got knocked out of the NSL.
  "And the mighty sides of the '60s - Polonia and Ringwood City - have never
been able to fight back to their former strength.
  "It wouldn't surprise me if a club like Green Gully moves to the verge
of non-existence within a year."
  Gully and George Cross have been arch rivals for 20 years mainly because
they attract support largely from the Maltese community.
  Gully has the better facilities at Green Gully Reserve, while Cross has
always had the bigger following and a merger between the two clubs has
often been seen in soccer circles as the ideal solution for one stronger
club.
  But intense rivalry has always put a stop to the possibility and the
committees were put under pressure when talks were suggested two years
ago.
  Zahra still believes it would be ideal but will not make approaches.
  "We made the initial move last time and were rudely told off, so it's now
a situation of once bitten, twice shy.
  "However we remain the club prepared to listen, and if the few heads that
there are at Green Gully use logic, I still believe that the linking up
of the two clubs would be the ideal solution for us (the Maltese community)
to become a force to be reckoned with not only in Victoria but throughout
Australia."
  Green Gully has lost much of the drive it used to go from the lower reaches
of the Victorian League to enter the NSL despite its poor support.
  The club needs a massive shake-up but has no ready-made replacement for
Guy Spiteri, who has become disillusioned with the soccer 
set-up and is determined to step down as president at the end of the season.
  Spiteri played down the situation and remained defiant despite Zahra's
gloomy predictions.
  "The NSL clubs are still living in dreamland and the league cannot be a
goer for much longer when the 24 clubs owe the league around $330,000,"
Spiteri said.
 "We'll just go back quietly to the State League and wait for all of the
rest (the seven Melbourne NSL clubs) to come back.
 "Green Gully will win the State League next year just to get the opportunity
of knocking back the invitation to join the NSL," Spiteri said.

 Runaway winner  

SCOTT FRASER is runaway winner as Green Gully's player of the year.

 Appeal date  

THE appeal against Brunswick Juventus developing the former Brunswick tip
site into the club's home ground will be heard on November 5.
  The club wants to establish Clifton Park, now cluttered with rubbish
and weeds, into a soccer stadium with grandstand, social club as well
as having training grounds, a tennis court and bocce rinks.
  Juve has the support of the Planning and Environment Minister and the
Brunswick council.
  A small protest group has claimed the area was promised as open public
space.
  Juve administrators believe this appeal is the last avenue for the 
protesters and are hopeful the three-member appeal board will 
rule in favor of the club to enable work to start on the project early next 
year.
  Juve vice-president Domenic Tenuta hopes the club will take a big contingent
of supporters to Adelaide this Sunday for the semi-final against Adelaide
City.
  Buses will leave Melbourne at 1 am Sunday and return straight after the
game.  Cost $40 return; bookings through Tenuta on 383 2213.

