Conservatorium `bulging at the seams' on present site  

THE Queensland Conservatorium of Music wants to move to the Expo 88 site
on Brisbane's South Bank after the exposition.
  The idea is the latest in Brisbane's great debate - what to do with the
40 ha of prime real estate after the six-month, $250 million Expo finishes
on October 30, 1988. 
  The Conservatorium acting director, Mr Max Olding, yesterday said a proposal
had been put to the State Government mid-year but no answer had yet been
received.
  He said the Conservatorium, now on the Queensland Institute of Technology
campus, was bulging at the seams.
  A South Bank site next to the Cultural Centre would centralise the city's
cultural activities.
  The Queensland Institute of Technology deputy director, Dr Tom Dixon,
said the Federal and State Governments were sympathetic to the proposal,
which would make room for 800 extra QIT students.
  There were no proposals to move QIT to the Expo site.
  A spokesman for the Premier's Department said it was too early to discuss
whether the Conservatorium would relocate.
  The Expo Authority late last month called for worldwide expressions of
interest, to be lodged by February 16 next year.
  The authority, the Brisbane City Council and the State Government will
consider the submissions.
  The Expo chairman, Sir Llew Edwards, has said money is not the top priority
in the post-Expo scheme.
  It was an opportunity to leave the greatest memorial to Brisbane, he said.
  Yesterday, suggestions ranged from a State zoo, a drama centre, convention
centre and "realistic" proposals for a composite commercial, public space
and residential development.
  A senior partner in real estate agents Hillier Parker, Mr Rod Samut, said
the site was a valuation nightmare because it was not subject to town planning
regulations.
  It was tentatively worth about $300 million but its value was dependent
on what could be built there.
  "It is the most exclusive site in any capital city in Australia and it
should be given back to the people," Mr Samut said.
  "Brisbane doesn't have a zoo.  It would be marvellous site for perhaps
a maritime zoo for our young kids to enjoy.
  "It would be a shame to fragment the central business district by having
a commercial development on the site.
  "No one would propose another industrial development and there is not
a strong market for high "medium-rise residential areas."
  The Performing Arts Complex director, Mr Tony Gould, said a drama centre
on the site would complete Brisbane's magnificent cultural centre.
  He accepted that some commercial development was likely but hoped it
would complement the complex.
  The Brisbane Development Association president, Mr Noel Robinson, said
it was unrealistic to propose a zoo or to move educational institutions
to the site.
  "Expo will want the best dollar value it can get and there would have to
be a very good reason not to take the highest tender," he said.
  Mr Robinson said a likely result would be a mixture of commercial, open
space and residential uses.
  The director of architect firm Conrad and Gargett Pty Ltd, Mr Elwyn Wyeth,
said the site was ideal for an upmarket residential development, with about
20 percent devoted to commercial development.

