Urgent talks called over shop protest  

AN URGENT State Industrial Commission conference today will try to avert
a shop assistants' stopwork rally against Queensland's deregulated shopping
hours trial.
  A meeting of 200 Queensland Shop Assistants Union Brisbane delegates
representing more than 15,000 members yesterday voted unanimously to hold
a protest rally in the Brisbane City Hall at 10 a.m. next Thursday.
  The Retailers Association later applied for a State Industrial Commission
conference and planned to call the commission to direct the cancellation
of any stoppages.
  The shop assistants' union State secretary, Mr John Hogg, said the rally
would cause a staff shortage in Brisbane stores.
  The stoppage was the first action in the union's campaign against the
one-month trial of unrestricted shopping hours starting on December 15.
  Mr Hogg said the normally conservative union was being forced to take
action.  "We are in boots-and-all to fight deregulation because of the State
Government's ignorance," he said.
 Mr Hogg said a "constant stream" of members had told him they would resign
if deregulated shopping was introduced.
  He accused the State Government of having no regard for the transport
and safety of young people who would be made to work odd hours.
  The Retailers Association executive director, Mr Phil Naylor, said he
believed the stopwork amounted to a strike.
  "If they are not at work, we consider they are on strike."
  He said the rally was "highly irresponsible and would affect many retailers
who were trying to bolster sales during the Christmas period after a poor
trading year.
  Mr Naylor said most retailers planned to follow the Business Owners and
Managers Association recommendations of not opening on Sundays but trading
on Saturday afternoons and one extra night a week.
  However, Myer planned to trade seven days a week from its Queen Street,
Brisbane, Gold Coast Pacific Fair, Toowoomba and suburban Brisbane stores,
he said.
  The Queensland Tourist and Travel Corporation and two Brisbane
international hotels yesterday said they believed extended trading hours
would help Brisbane's international image.
  A Brisbane Sheraton spokesman said Americans used to 24-hour trading had
commented on the lack of trading in the city.   
  A Mayfair Crest Hotel spokesman said international guests would appreciate
extended trading.
  The present shopping hours were not helping Brisbane's international
reputation, he said.
  The Queensland Tourist and Travel Corporation managing director, Mr Pat
King, said yesterday many people in the tourist industry supported deregulated
trading.
  The corporation itself supported deregulated trading hours, particularly
in areas of high tourist traffic.
  Australia rated below average as an international destination for good
shopping, partly because of restricted trading hours, he said.
  In Bundaberg, a meeting of about 80 percent of the city's retailers yesterday
voted to work the trading hours set by the State Industrial Commission.

