CIA ran guerrilla war fund:  report WASHINGTON  

- The United States Central Intelligence Agency ran a $500 million
account in Switzerland to bankroll anti-communist guerrillas in at least
three countries, a report said last night.
  The Washington Post said arms were purchased with the fund for
anti-government forces in Angola, Moslem guerrillas in Afghanistan and
Nicaraguan Contra rebels.
  Money in the account included profits from US arms sales to Iran.
  The report said the fund contained $US250 million (A$387 million) secretly
appropriated by Congress to aid rebels fighting Soviet troops in Afghanistan
and an equal amount from Saudi Arabia which was used to buy Soviet, Chinese
and other arms from dealers.                           
  Congressional investigators had found that the $US10-30 million (A$15-46
million) in profits from the Iranian operation was put into the same bank account.
  An administration source was quoted as saying the Swiss account supplied
funds from which "the various accounts involving the Reagan doctrine are
administered".
  The doctrine referred to is the President's policy of supporting insurgents
battling communist governments in the Third World.
  The CIA is supposed to keep separate records of how the funds are disbursed
but a Congressional source told the Post the agency was having trouble
identifying separate accounts and military purchases.
  By law, the CIA is supposed to turn over any profits from sale of material
to the US Treasury.
  The Swiss fund was administered by the CIA but had been monitored by the
National Security Council deputy director, Mr Donald Fortier, who died earlier
this year.
  Since Mr Fortier's death, the source said, the job was apparently handled
by Marine Lt Col Oliver North, who was fired from his NSC job last week.
  The US Attorney-General, Mr Edwin Meese, has described North, now under
questioning by the Senate intelligence committee, as the only person who
knew precisely about the profits of the Iran arms sale and their diversion
to the Contras.
  Members of Congress are questioning whether the diversion of funds to
the Contras violated the Boland Amendment which prohibited the use of US
finances for military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.
  Meanwhile, Congressional leaders yesterday hailed President Reagan's move
to appoint a special prosecutor over the Iran-Contras scandal.
  They said it was a first step towards resolving the political crisis
engulfing his Administration.
  They also unanimously welcomed his appointment of Mr Frank Carlucci, 56,
as the new National Security Adviser - the fifth during Mr Reagan's six
years of office.                       

