Myth and fable alive and well on the Australian wine scene  

  WINE, because its history extends for thousands of years, has always been
a subject for fables, myths and traditions.
  Until that illustrious French scientist, Louis Pasteur, established the
basic nature of the fermentation process, the wine lover had an almost
mystical view of wine.  Many still do.
  Although much of the fable and myth has gone, there are probably hundreds
of mistaken beliefs that are held by some wine drinkers.  Many of these myths
have a basis in truth, but the oenologist or viticulturist now has the
tools at his or her disposal to remove the agreeable romanticism and establish
the facts.
  There is a widespread belief in the Australian wine-drinking community
that all dry red wines improve with age and all dry white wines should be
consumed within weeks or months of purchase.  There must be millions of
bottles of dry red wine stored in cellars, garages, under houses and in
cupboards that would have been better drunk the day purchased.
  Equally, many fine Australian chardonnays, semillons and rhine rieslings
would benefit from some years in the cellar.  Whether a wine will improve
with keeping depends on its acidity, pH, alcohol level, tannin and a number
of other factors.  Ask the winemaker!
  For many years the red wines of the Hunter Valley made from shiraz (sometimes
called hermitage) grapes were described as having a character known as
"sweaty saddle".  This odor is now known to be caused by the presence of
hydrogen sulphide, or worse still its chemical successors, 
mercaptans and disulphides.
  The character is, in fact, a major wine fault and Hunter winemakers are
now rarely guilty in this regard.  Wine drinkers however continue to talk
about this "desirable" quality.
  This fault is related to the view that all red wines should "breathe".
 A century ago custom decreed the wine was opened some hours before drinking
and then decanted.  This, it was said, removed the "bottle stink". It did
in fact allow the worst of the hydrogen sulphide fault to disappear.
  There are some modern red wines that improve after opening because they
have been so carefully protected from oxygen that they are "dumb" and need
a little time in contact with the air.
  A relatively modern myth surrounding red wine is:  "The histamines in
the wine cause headaches."  This fallacious concept was laid to rest some
years ago but it can be confidently asserted that whatever causes the headache
it is not large amounts of histamine.
  Gil Wahlquist of Botobalar Vineyards, Mudgee, puts it well:  "They complain
about the headache from the bottle of red wine forgetting that they drank
three bottles of white wine before it."
  Another myth, this time a viticultural one, is that there is some real
difference between wines in Australia labelled traminer and 
gewurtztraminer  To our knowledge no commercial Australian 
wine has been made from traminer.  The traminer, correctly named sauvignon 
blanc (not to be confused with sauvignon blanc) no longer exists in Alsace, the 
great gewurtztraminer region.
  All the traminers and gewurtztraminers in Australia are 
from the same grape.  However if that great and knowledgeable 
patriarch of the Hunter, Murray Tyrrell, can continue to label 
chardonnay wines, we say incorrectly, as pinot chardonnay, then the traminer 
confusion is a minor sin.
  Other myths that plague the seller of wine include the confusion between
"fruit" and "sweetness", the mystical relationship between soil and quality
to the exclusion of climate and the belief that corks "breathe".  (If they
did all our wines would be oxidised).
AN INTERESTING selection of wines is available for tasting at the spring
wine festival being held at Stewart's Springwood Hotel tonight between 6
and 8 p.m.  This is the last of three opportunities for winelovers to sample
156 wines from 20 wine companies.
A VISIT to the Granite Belt at this time of year will enable the interested
wine lover to see the vines just after the point in the growth cycle known
as bud-burst.  This occurred for the earlier varieties such as pinot noir
and chardonnay in the last week in September, and should occur this week
for late varieties such as cabernet sauvignon and merlot.

