PILGRIM OF PEACE Pope's Aussie welcome  

THE pilgrim of peace, Pope John Paul II, was given a people's welcome to
Australia yesterday.
  It was a welcome of cheers, prayers, sun hats and Eskies - a relaxed start
to the Pope's 6 1/2-day tour of Australia.
  The crowd of 1500 at Fairbairn Air Base in Canberra and the 80,000 who
waited for hours for an open air Mass were many more than those who greeted
the Pontiff in New Zealand during the weekend.
  However, the numbers were still a little below expectations of the Papal
tour organisers.
  But the welcome was as warm as the sunshine in Canberra and the 66-year-old
Pontiff responded to it.
  The Pope arrives in Brisbane this morning.
  Last night he delivered a speech at Parliament House in Canberra in which
he called for "appropriate disarmament". 
  When he went walkabout yesterday at the Fairbairn Air Base where his Air
New Zealand jet landed, the excitement was evident.
  The Pope knows how to win a crowd.
  He moved slowly, kissing, touching and blessing those lucky enough to
be close to the barrier, touching even the smallest child, ignoring no one,
though barely speaking.
  For a man who is the subject of intense scrutiny from the world press,
the Pontiff hardly seems to notice the attention he attracts.
  The banners bore the Pope's personal motto, Totus tuus (Latin for All
Yours).
  And he was.
  While the Latin words were on the banners, it was very much an Australian
occasion.
  It wouldn't have been a surprise if the Pope had been greeted with a friendly
"G'day".
  While the use of Latin was a slightly incongruous touch, it set the
tone for a day in which the centuries-old rituals of the Catholic Church
were played out under a blazing Australian sun.
  Incongruity at the air base when the man of peace was given a full military
welcome.
  Incongruity at the National Exhibition Centre where the solemnity of the
mass was offset by a deck chair and sun hat crowd.
  It was almost as if the Australian church was making sure that, while
its head may reside 16,000km away in the Vatican, when in Australia he
must do as the Australians do.
  When he stepped from the aircraft to the tarmac he continued his tradition
of going on his knees to kiss the ground.
  The incongruity started even then when this successor of St Peter, dressed
in a heavy white cassock reaching out to the faithful on an airforce base
which even potted pines and a red carpet could not soften.
  Welcomed by Governor General Sir Ninian and Lady Stephen, the Prime Minister
and Mrs Hawke and church leaders, the Pontiff told Australians in a 20-minute
speech he had come as a pilgrim and a friend.
  As a friend he urged people to direct their hearts to God, to find the
full explanation of human dignity; as a pilgrim he was on a journey as an
act of religious devotion.
  Then came another touch of unreality over the massive security which
surrounds him.
  The head of Vatican security, Mr Cibin Camilla, may look a little like
a nightclub bouncer, and the security men are certainly ever present, but
when the Pope gets into his bulletproof Popemobile he drives off with the
side window open.
  The Pope left the air base in his bullet-proof Popemobile to conduct an
open air Mass at the National Exhibition Centre.
  En route he drove past hundreds of supporters gathered at traffic
intersections.
  Before conducting the Mass, the Pontiff changed into the special vestments
required in a very suburban mobile home brought in for the occasion.
  During the special Mass the Pope likened the sufferings of Christ to
the pioneering efforts of early Australians.
  Earlier, at the Fairbairn air base, the Pope delivered his first speech
in Australia spelling out his message of friendship.
  Telling Australians we are a people of undoubted goodwill, he said:
  "I come as a friend; to urge you to pursue your lives all those values
worthy of a human person; to encourage you to be open hearted, generous
to the unfortunate and caring towards those who are pushed to the margins
of life.
  "Many of you follow Him in discipleship and still others of you revere
His teachings.  But whether or not you profess faith in Jesus Christ, or
talk about this faith with the language I use, I ask you to consider the
profound truth of the Fatherhood of God and the unity of all men and women
and children of God.
  "I ask you to reflect on what the world could be if people everywhere
acknowledged these truths and lived their lives in accordance with them."
  Reflecting on what we can do to help each other at home and abroad, he
said:  "We were made - all of us - for life and for love.  We need mutual
encouragement and support.  In the loving providence of God our Father,
the world is meant to provide a home for the whole human family; there is
room for everyone to live and there can be sustenance for all.  And everyone
has the right to pursue his or her destiny with dignity, and to share in
the good things that God has made available to His children."
  For Australia's estimated 3.8 million Catholics, his arrival marked only
the second Papal visit in Australia's history.
  But the 1970 Sydney visit of Pope Paul VI is likely to pale beside the
current tour.

