Security shake-up as new Popemobile breaks  

A back-up bulletproof car will be included in the Papal procession through
Brisbane after the "indestructible" Popemobile broke down during a rehearsal
yesterday.
  The custom-built Popemobile threw a security scare into tour organisers
when its transmission failed during the rehearsal at QEII stadium.
  But the police commander for Pope John Paul II's visit, Assistant
Commissioner Ron Redmond, said it was fortunate the problem had surfaced.
  "This eventuality had been foreseen and a reserve bulletproof vehicle
will be in the escort in case the Popemobile breaks down," Mr Redmond said.
  "Mechanics have rectified the problem and the Popemobile should see out
the entire Brisbane tour."
  A massive police security operation, which includes a crack anti-terrorist
squad, swung into action yesterday in readiness for the Pope's whirlwind
visit.
  Queensland police polished security arrangements by travelling the Pope's
route with the Popemobile, police escorts and RAAF surveillance helicopters.
  The Popemobile's transmission failed after the three-tonne vehicle had
done a lap of the QEII stadium.
  A police spokesman said Sunday's Turkish consulate bombing in Melbourne
had not affected security arrangements.
  "At this stage, the bombing has nothing to do with the Papal visit and
as security levels are very high, every reasonable precaution has been
taken," he said.
  More than 800 police, including undercover officers who will mingle
with Pope-watchers, will be responsible for crowd control at Brisbane
Airport and along the route to QEII and the City Hall.
  One of the most worrying security aspects will be the Pope's blessing
of Brisbane from the City Hall balcony.
  Mr Redmond has said:  "The high-rises around the City Hall are a worry
and situations like that, when the Pope is out of his vehicle, will be covered
with the necessary weapons."
  More than 140,000 people are expected to see the Pope during his packed
six-hour visit.
  Public transport arrangements are the biggest for an event in Queensland,
with 22 extra train services and 200 buses at the ready.
  Transport Minister Mr Lane and Lord Mayor Ald Atkinson have asked people
to use public transport.
  Education Minister Mr Powell has stressed that today is not a school
holiday. 
  But parents have the option of sending their children to school.

