<subsample>
	<id> A27b </id>
	


	<source> The Adelaide Advertiser - 2 July 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> A child's portion of service </h>
	

Eating out with children is a necessary part of their overall education.
 And while the Australian tradition is that kids should be neither seen nor
heard outside fast-food outlets, some restaurants do their best to make children
welcome.
  Children need to be introduced to the pleasures of eating out as part
of their social education.  They need to visit restaurants and learn the
art of behaving in a public eating place.  The need to know how to read and
understand a menu and to order from it, and to discover the pleasure of eating
foods more sophisticated than they are served at home.  They need to know
how to be polite customers and at the same time to be aware of the consumer
rights of diners.
  If children eat out with their parents regularly, or only occasionally,
they will be secure about going to restaurants when they begin to dine
out with friends.
  But do restaurants really welcome children as part of the family group
and tomorrow's patrons?  Obviously, there are some silver-service restaurants
which are not designed for child customers, mostly because the 
extended nature of the meals.  A small child could not be expected to sit 
through a four-hour dinner.
  However, parents cannot hope to teach their children restaurant manners
if they are restricted to going only to hamburger, pizza or fast-food outlets.
  Four journalists who are parents of young children were asked to road
test a few local restaurants to see how welcome their children were and
how the staff coped with the child customers.
  JOHN Brittle took his daughters Marie-Lorraine, 8 and Catherine, 4 to
Fasta Pasta in Pirie Street, city:
  We got off to a good start at Fasta Pasta.  We were barely in the restaurant
before a cheerful Italian chucked one of the girls under the chin and said:
&quot;Hello, beautiful&quot;.
  I thought we might be swamped with attention just as parents - or a parent
- with kids usually are treated in restaurants in Italy and most Latin
countries.  But we weren't overwhelmed.  We were underwhelmed.
  There was plenty of room and we took a table against a wall.
  We lined up, selected and ordered.
  Helping the kids make their selection from a blackboard they couldn't read,
and hoisting the little one up to see the salads, took a little time. 
  There were few other patrons so the delay didn't really matter.  But there
was no help from the staff as I would have received in Rome, Madrid or Buenos
Aires.
  The bread was excellent and thick-cut and the two hungry kids loved it.
  The antipasto was so-so and half of it was left uneaten.  The children
love spaghetti and dug into the steaming plates with Bolognaise sauce.
  I had to help the younger one.  At home we usually cut up her spaghetti
so she can eat it with a spoon.
  None of the staff, who were passing to and fro, offered to cut it up or
made any move to help.  I had to lean across the table to wind each forkful
for her.  We managed.  We had to ask twice for more paper napkins to clean
up faces and the table.
  The children couldn't finish the spaghetti, but like all kids somehow
found room for ice-cream, in this case, cassata.
  I was disappointed in the rather offhand service.  We had to ask for
everything.  No-one came to see whether we wanted anything or to ask how
the food was - and for part of the time there were more staff in the restaurant
than customers.
  On the positive side, the &quot;child's portions&quot; were too big for my kids to
handle.  The hot food was hot.
  And the kids rated the spaghetti &quot;excellent&quot;.  As we left one said: &quot;Don't
mention another word about food&quot;.  There was certainly no skimping on serves.
But the offhandedness of the staff I find curious.
  I recall many nights in Italy, Spain and Argentina - where the population
is about half Italian - seeing in restaurants families, with small kids,
with the the kids on highchairs being thoroughly spoilt by waiters giving
them their own menus, napkins, drinks and food, cutting it for them and
generally making a fuss of them.
  Usually, walking into a restaurant with kids in those countries assures
a rush of attention.  That's why I thought we were off to a good start at
Fasta Pasta.  Perhaps we prefer to be left alone when we eat out - even
with the kids.
  But give me the Latin attitude any time.
  Children are considered part of the regular clientele, especially on Fridays
and Saturdays, said partner of Fasta Pasta, Enrico Siano.  &quot;However sometimes
I have to ask parents to watch their children, as with all the hot dishes
moving about I am concerned there may be an accident.&quot;
  This is a report by Jamie Goode, aged 14 months, as told to his mother:
  Going to restaurants can be a drag when you're only 14 months old.  At
Mount Lofty House, the maitre d smiled rather strangely at my parents 
and me when we arrived.
  He seated us in a cramped corner, next to the swinging kitchen door, and
then pretended we didn't exist, even though he kept stumbling over my pram.
  We waited for more than 40 minutes for Devonshire tea, while later arrivals
were served.
  My parents kept wheeling me around the gardens during the wait. After a
while that became very boring.  Finally, we gave up and went home.  By then
I was tired, cranky and starving.
  But a recent visit to the Botanic Gardens Restaurant was much nicer.
The manager greeted us with a big, friendly grin and seated us at a table
with lots of room.  He put me in a highchair so I could look out the picture
windows.  I really enjoyed looking outside and watching the birds flying
overhead and the children playing in the gardens.
  The waitress was also very nice.  She took our order right away and promptly
brought us glasses of orange juice.  She also gave us several napkins and
said: &quot;Just let me know if you need any more.  I know how it is.&quot;  I wonder
what she meant by that?
  Mummy and Daddy helped themselves to the salad bar and shared their portions
with me.  I liked the tomatoes, lettuce, potato salad, biscuits and cheese.
  My parents ordered the grilled whiting and the Wiener schnitzel for
the main course.  The fish was grilled to perfection.  Unfortunately, the
schnitzel was a bit tough and oily.  After a few tentative bites, I tossed
it into the air.
  It made the most satisfactory thud when it hit the ground.
  By the end of the meal there was a fine litter of food scattered about
my highchair.  I really don't know how it happened but it was most decorative.
 My parents started clearing up, but the manager told them not to trouble
themselves.
  &quot;Don't worry, we'll take care of it,&quot; he said in a relaxed, assuring manner.
  He even complimented me on my table manners.  Another first for my family.
  Families are clearly welcome.  On another visit, we saw a group of mums
and bubs having lunch.  The waitress was very attentive and helpful - heating
bottles, serving requested child's portions, and providing napkins.
  I can hardly wait to go again.
  Mount Lofty House Restaurant does not actively encourage children as guests,
said the director, Janet Sands.  &quot;We have no highchairs, no child menus,
no real facilities for children.  If they arrive we accommodate them as
well as we can.  However, we are quite adaptable.
  The management of the Botanic Gardens Restaurant welcomes children, but
expects parents to keep them under control to the extent of not disturbing
other diners.
  Samela Harris, has two sons, 13 and 7, who are regular diners out.  Their
favorite outing is to a Chinese restaurant:
  Sam, aged 7, is well-travelled and used to restaurants.  In his carry-cot
he enjoyed some of Europes's most illustrious restaurants.  But that is
Europe where babies are part of life and children are people.  
  Because ritzy Australian restaurants are terribly precious about their
exclusivity, few parents would dare to take their young in case of sneers
from maitre ds.  We have been conditioned to believe that junk-food eateries
are where one takes children and gourmet restaurants are for appreciative
adults.    
  Sam is not beyond the odd hamburger but he prefers real food and loves
to eat good Chinese cuisine.  Honey prawns in sesame are a passion with him.
  Fortunately the Chinese have not caught up with the Australian attitude
towards children.  They have high-chairs for babies and marvellous lazy
susans to entrance older children.  They have wide varieties of food to
please everyone from the fastidious to the adventurous.
  Sam has eaten yum cha in most of the restaurants which serve it on Sundays.
  The Dynasty in Gouger Street, is his favorite.  His odd jocularity that
the chicken feet are like ET's hands are not taken askance by the Chinese
staff, although they may have no idea what he is on about.  But their innate
good manners make them respond with interest to his comments and sheer
delight that an Aussie kid is devouring chicken feet at all.
  When the adults are still chatting on and finishing the wine, the Chinese
staff are not perturbed that Sam wanders over to chat with them or scrutinise
the fish tanks.  He, like the many Chinese children who go for yum cha,
is very welcome - and made to feel so.
  Sunday's a really family day at the Dynasty Restaurant, said proprietor
Peter Ng, but the restaurant welcomes children and family groups at any
time.
  Rosemary Clark has two children, Neil, 9, and Terri, 7:
  The culinary tastes of Neil and his sister are oceans apart.
  Neil is a pasta-lover and would twirl his fork around spaghetti at every
dining-out opportunity.
  It may be a little harder for him to twirl his tongue around the names
of some Italian dishes - but that does not stop him from ordering cappelleti
alla panna or spaghetti amatriciana from his favorite Italian restaurant.
  The easy-going atmosphere and plain, solid furnishings in most Italian
eateries ideally suit the sometimes less-than-genteel table manners of young
diners.  
  Chinese food is Terri's delight.  Honey chicken is top of the list, with
chicken chop suey coming a close second.  In fact, anything containing
chicken meets with her approval.
  On days when compromise is not in Neil and Terri's vocabulary the
International Food Plaza at the Central Market is the answer. 
  It is a place where the taste for twirling spaghetti and finger-licking
spring rolls mix.  Families can enjoy, not just endure, a trip to a restaurant.
  Dining out should be a fun, learning experience for children, so parents
should choose the venue carefully.
  Staff in Chinese restaurants invariably make youngsters feel both important
and wanted.  Dropping a chopstick on the ground is not considered a clanger,
and the occasional spilt drink is cleared up without a fuss.
  Peter Westgarth is a 29-year-old bachelor.
  He has not enjoyed the proximity of noisy, ill-behaved children in restaurants
and says the maxim which states children should be seen and not heard is overdue
for re-writing.
  He suggests something such as: &quot;Keep 'em quiet and teach 'em right&quot;.
  He thinks that these days, too many parents seem prepared to let their
children do whatever they like.  


</subsample>
