Matron will stay, rules Taylor  

THE row between the Health Minister, Mr Taylor, and Gnowangerup Hospital
Board over Matron Ruth Griffiths reached a new pitch yesterday.
   Mr Taylor decided to scrap plans for a tribunal inquiry into her
unexplained sacking and ordered her reinstatement.
  But hospital board chairman John Humphreys last night said that the board
would stick by its decision.
  Mr Taylor said that he was angry at the hospital board's rejection of
what he called his "last-ditch attempt" to resolve the dispute.
  He condemned the board's rejection and said that its "absolute intransigence"
was astounding.
  The Minister's decision follows his efforts to mediate since the board
decided to sack the matron several weeks ago.
  At first, Mr Taylor said that he had not been given valid reasons for her
dismissal and asked the board to reinstate her.
  The board's refusal - and an outcry from Gnowangerup residents complaining
of past doctor-matron clashes - resulted in the Minister's tribunal plan.
  He had proposed a three-member tribunal, perhaps involving the nurses,
union, the Australian Medical Association and an independent chairman.
  Mr Taylor said that Matron Griffiths and the nurses' union agreed but
the board refused.
  "The absolute intransigence  of the board is astounding - especially
as the matron is willing to participate," he said.
  He now had no choice but to go ahead and reinstate Matron Griffiths -
who was surprised by the news last night.
  She said that she was still awaiting a date to return to the hospital
and until then she was "keeping busy."
  The Minister said he did not want to sack the hospital board but its
membership would be thrown open tomorrow night at the hospital's annual
general meeting .
  Mr Humphreys said the Minister's claim that the board had acted
intransigently was "ridiculous."
  "The Minister does not know the facts," he said.  
  "He does not know the reasons behind the sacking."
  He said that the reasons had been revealed only to the board's lawyer
and he disputed Mr Taylor's power to reinstate the matron.
 "Only the Government has that power," he said.
 Mr Humphreys said that the board had opposed a tribunal inquiry because
it was on the condition that it withdrew the matron's dismissal notice.
  "I feel we have the support of the town and that we should stand by our
actions," Mr Humphreys said.
  The controversy surrounding Matron Griffiths came to a head earlier
this year when the Medical Board cleared a former Gnowangerup hospital doctor,
Terence Gould, of misconduct charges brought by the matron.
  She first made headlines in 1978 when the town's GP of 20 years, Dr Alec
Winrow, resigned and moved away after reporting difficulties with the
matron.
  In 1985 a rift emerged with the town GP, Dr Peter Cummins, who in December
referred his patients to Katanning Hospital, 60km away.

