Waiting for a big family  

A FINE old home in Vale Road, Mt Lawley, deserves a family, according to
the present owner who has been its main occupant for several years.
  It could certainly accommodate a big family, as it was built on a grand
scale, like many other old Mt Lawley homes. 
  The house is divided into two self-contained sections, with the main area
in front, and a granny flat behind.  The latter could be used either for
this purpose or as children's quarters, or the house could be restored to
its original one-residence form.
  The 1923 Federation-style home was built for Mr Stephen Earle and bought
from his daughter by the present owner in 1972.
  It was built by Cavanagh and Spanney, who were involved with the construction
of St Mary's Cathedral, as well as with a number of other grand old Mt Lawley
residences.
  Its outstanding features include jarrah timberwork throughout, original
stained glass and leadlight windows and light fittings in 
turn-of-the-century style.
  The ceiling cornices in the main rooms feature patterns of WA wildflowers
- geraldton wax, wattle, gumnuts and leaves - with a different flower in
various rooms.
  There are four fireplaces, with oak and jarrah surrounds.
  The house will be auctioned on site at noon on June 7.
  The main section consists of an entry hall, formal sitting room, dining
room, three double bedrooms, kitchen and study, all surrounded by verandas.
  A striking feature of the dining room is a draped layer of cream chinese
silk sewn into the ceiling.
  The refurbished kitchen, which includes a breakfast nook, is equipped with
a gas stove and electric oven and opens on to a sunroom, with enclosed veranda
beyond to provide an extensive outdoor eating area when fine weather beckons.
  The bathroom has also been upgraded, and boasts a carpeted floor - the
old bath is now filled with water lilies in the backyard.
  The granny flat, which has not been used for two years, is designed on
versatile lines and could well serve as children's quarters.
  It has a separate entrance and looks out on a huge terraced garden and
barbecue area which is a delight - it would be hard to imagine a better
place in which to "get away from it all" when the going gets tough.
  There's also an orchard section, producing lemons, grapes, mandarins,
and a special plus, a fruiting avocado.
  The gardens, which are reticulated from a bore, are spotlighted, to
provide a touch of magic on a summer night.
  Rose bushes abound in the front garden, where there are also terraced lawns.
 Barry North or Gerald Morgan, of Acton Consolidated, will open the house
for inspection from 11am till noon on Wednesdays and Saturdays, and also
by appointment at other times.           

