It could only happen in the Kimberleys  

The first of a three-part series by Tom JENKINS, who has just returned from
a visit to WA's remote north.
  THERE's a python at the bottom of Aileen Hackett's garden.
  It's probably about 4.5 metres long and about once a week (at night) it
comes to feed on the birds in the Pandanus Palm Wildlife Park and Zebra
Rock Gallery which Mrs Hackett runs beside the Ord River near Kununurra.
  While she is getting irritated about the python, or helping a kangaroo
joey back into his bag hanging on a veranda post (or caring for pigeons,
parrots, emus and donkeys, or polishing zebra rock into gemstones) her husband
Noel is busy growing bananas.
  It could all only happen in one part of Western Australia: The Kimberleys.  
The Hacketts have been on the Ord for 22 years.  Like many other people there,  
they have tried different ways of making a living: Cotton, wheat and chaff, 
then, five years ago, they got a new block of land on Packsaddle Plain and are 
now getting good prices for bananas sent to Perth and Adelaide.
  Their wildlife park is becoming known and in the busy season they may
have 300 visitors a day.  At the bottom of the garden (in truth, at the
end of the paddock beyond the garden) is the Ord River, broadened here into
Lake Kununurra behind the Diversion Dam.
  They have a mining lease to take the beautiful red-and-cream zebra rock
from an island in Lake Argyle, the huge and controversial lake nine times
the size of Sydney Harbour created behind the main Ord River Dam.
  We met the Hacketts on our second day in the Kimberleys.  On the evening
of the first day, we had driven to Lake Argyle.
  The road lay through noble red hills, their rocky spines ridged like
dinosaurs, the views into purple distance framed by slender, pale trees,
jade-green-leaved.  As the sun sank, the red light intensified so that the
hills glowed.
  Past the rather tatty Lake Argyle tourist village (a recycled construction
camp - there are plans for grander things) we drove up a stony hill and gazed
somewhat stunned, across this man-made lake.  It stretches forever, blue,
deep, serene.  Maybe its potential as a source of irrigation will never be
realised, but it is a sight that lifts your heart, this great water in a
dry land.
  There was just time to see the replacement for Argyle Downs Homestead,
now drowned.  It is too ordinary a building, but the mementos of the Durack
family are moving.
  By the time we left, the sun had set.  Under dying light, the old rocks
turned to purple.  Birdsong seemed to stop.
  We looked down into an ancient pool that, for millions of years has been
fed by waterfalls, shrunk by searing heat.  For a moment, I think we understood
a little of what this land means to the Aborigines.

