Murder, murder, and more murder  

PAUL STEVEN HAIGH, Victoria's worst mass murderer, confessed in
court last week to two more killings - bringing his gruesome tally to half
a dozen slayings.
  In 1979, at the age of 21, Paul Steven Haigh had already chosen his path
in life.
  It was to be bloody, filled with treachery and desperation, deadly jealousy
and a string of murders which shocked the country.
  Last week, in Melbourne's Supreme Court, the final curtain at last came
down on a savage and horrendous drama that had lasted nearly eight years.
  In an 11-month killing spree that began in September, 1978, seven people
were slain - six of them by the hand of Haigh, Victoria's worst mass murderer.
  Haigh, now 28, was taken back to Pentridge Prison last week after pleading
guilty to two more murders.
  He had been in Pentridge since 1981, after being convicted of the murder
of four people - one of them his girlfiend, another a nine-year-old boy.
  While in gaol, Haigh confessed to two more killings, becoming only the
sixth man in Victorian legal history to plead guilty in court to murder.
  Haigh confessed to police that he had shot a woman during an attempted
armed robbery at a Tattslotto agency in Windsor in September, 1978.
  He also confessed to killing a man during an attempted armed robbery at
a South Caulfield pizza shop in December that year.
  High said he killed Miss Evelyn Abrahams (58) in the Tattslotto agency
because he feared she was trying to run away.
  Miss Abrahams had turned her back on him and opened an office door to
ask an office manager: "What should I do?"
  Haigh told police he didn't hear the woman speak.  He thought she was
trying to be heroic.
  Haigh said he then shot her in the back of the head with a shotgun.
   In the second killing, Haigh confessed that he had jumped over the counter
of the South Caulfield pizza shop and had demanded money.
  When the owner of the shop, 45-year-old Bruno Cingolani, dived for a knife,
Haigh shot him in the stomach.  Mr Cingolani, a father of two, died three
days later.
  Last week Haigh was sentenced to a life term for each murder, the sentences
to be concurrent with the four life terms he received for the other murders.
  PAUL Steven Haigh was a good friend of convicted killer Robert Wright.
  Wright became friends with another criminal, convicted double killer Barry
Quinn, when Quinn was on the run after escaping from Pentridge Prison.
  Quinn was a ruthless and cold executioner.  Together, Haigh, Quinn and
Wright made a terrifying trio.
  This fearsome association culminated in five ruthless killings.
Quinn had escaped from Pentridge Prison on November 15, 1978, with the aid
of Eve Karlson and others.  His escape led to the multiple murders.
 The first to die was Quinn's girlfriend, Ivanka Katherine (Eve) Karlson,
who was shot at Mississippi Creek, near Warburton, between November 16,
1978 and July 30, 1979.
  On the run, Quinn and Karlson had met two other people, Sheryle Anne Gardner
(31) and her friend, Robert Wright.  Together they headed for Quinn's hideout
in the Warburton area.
  Both Eve Karlson and Sheryle Gardner had, at one time, been lovers of
Quinn.  There was a tension, a spiteful jealousy, brooding darkly between
the two women.
  After 69 days on the run, Quinn was recaptured.
  Some time later, Eve Karlson's decomposed body was found on the banks
of the Mississippi Creek.
  Although Quinn had confessed to killing Karlson, the police did not believe
him.  They felt he was covering up for Sheryle Gardner.
  The following month Sheryle Gardner was slain, along with her child.
  The connection between the next four killings was Quinn's escape from
Pentridge.
  On June 27, 1979, Wayne Keith Smith (27) was shot dead as he lay on his
bed in his St Kilda Road flat.
  Quinn had used Wayne Smith's house "for a couple of days" straight after
his escape, while Smith and Eve Karlson went about setting up a hideout
in the Warburton area.
  Then, on July 22, 1979, Sheryle Gardner and her son Danny William Mitchell
(9) were shot dead as they sat in their car at Ripponlea.
  On or about August 8, 1979, Lisa Maude Brearley (19) was stabbed 157 times
in Olinda State Forest, after being lured there on the pretence of a party.
  Her body was discovered on August 23 after an accomplice, fearing for
his life, contacted the police.
  Brearley had been Haigh's girlfriend.
  Police were to discover later that Wright and Haigh had used her to buy
the rifles used to kill Sheryle Gardner and her young son.
  Haigh, Wright and Quinn were all charged.
  Police said they had committed the murders because they thought the victims
"knew too much" about Quinn's escape from prison and the subsequent events.
  Quinn and Wright were acquitted on the charge of having murdered Eve
Karlson at Mississippi Creek.  Haigh was not implicated in this killing.
  Haigh was found guilty of murdering Gardner, Mitchell and Smith but not
guilty of murdering Brearley.
  Both Haigh and Wright were sentenced to life imprisonment.
  Back in prison, Quinn met a horrifying end when he was covered in industrial
glue and set alight in a workroom in Pentridge's maximum-security Jika
Jika section.  He was rushed to hospital but died soon afterwards.

