Ageing of Europe limits our growth By Andy Stoeckel  

  WALK AROUND the shopping centres and parks on a Sunday in Hamburg or Kiel
in West Germany and there's something striking - no kids!
  The unprecedented demographic revolution taking place in Europe will
have widespread economic effects and global repercussions for Australia
as well as for other countries.  This revolution is probably already affecting
economic policy in key countries and limiting the chances for world recovery.
  One West German demographer estimates that if the current decline in
population continues there will only be half as many Europeans in the year
2086 as now.  The lowest birth rate is in West Germany - 1.3 children per
woman - the lowest in the country's history.  Already the lower population
growth rates mean housing and land prices are falling at a time of supposedly
good economic growth and that has bankers worried.
  Some of the effects, such as closing schools and teacher layoffs (look
out for a big immigration of European teachers) are obvious enough.  But
the main economic influence will come from the ageing of the population.
This ageing is a consequence of declining birth rates and increasing life
expectancy due to medical advances.
  Over the next 25 years many of the major industrial economies - the "engines"
of the world economy - will have huge increases in the number of pensioners.
In Europe by the turn of the century 25 per cent of the population will
be over 60 years of age.  Moreover, the number of workers - the people paying
for the pensioners - will fall.
  The proportion of pensioners to the labour force will rise dramatically
to 64 per cent in West Germany and more than double in Japan to 43 per cent
by 2030.  These effects for key countries are shown in the chart.  This
increased burden of old people - higher medical care costs, pensions and
entitlements - will mean some hard choices for governments. They have four
choices: allow an explosion of public sector debt, increase taxes (including
by inflation), cut pensions and entitlements, or cut other expenditure.
  It is this prospect of ballooning public sector debt that is affecting
the slow world recovery, the falling US dollar and hence our own prospects.
  First, as stated in previous articles in this column, macroeconomic policies
between the majors are out of phase. While the United States has been running
large fiscal deficits, West Germany and Japan have maintained tight fiscal
policies. This has contributed to the huge US current account deficit,
the enormous debt build-up and the falling US dollar.
  One of the often-stated remedies is for the Japanese and West Germany
economies to reflate their economies through fiscal expansion. A domestic
expansion by these two should lead to increased imports, encourage world
economic growth and ease the US trade deficit.
  While true, this point should not be overplayed. Martin Feldstein, past
chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, a US economic
think tank, estimates that a 2 per cent a year rise in GNP in every country
in the world for the next two years would raise US exports in 1989 by less
than $US15 billion - only 10 per cent of the the US trade deficit! That
is also the reason there has to be a further big decline of the US dollar.
  Income changes alone will not close the US trade gap and price changes
(devaluations) will be necessary.
  But there is no doubt that fiscal expansion by West Germany and Japan
would lift world economic growth, ease US trade problems, improve world
trade, lift commodity prices and ease Third World debt problems. So, why
don't West Germany and Japan expand more than they are doing now? Wouldn't
that be universally popular? Let us go back to the ageing factor.
  West Germany and Japan face public sector debt explosions to finance the
increasing pension costs (see chart). Organisations for Economic Co-operation
and Development projections of public sector debt in these countries, assuming
no change in pension costs and taking account of the likely changes, highlight
the dramatic influence of the demographic changes. The ratio of debt to
GNP in Japan could be over 100 per cent by 2010. 

