Politicians set to toil harder for their pay By Michael Grealy  

THE underworked politicians who fill the red leather benches of the NSW
Legislative Council may soon have to toil harder for their handsome salaries.
  State Cabinet has received a report recommending a Senate-style committee
system for the 45-member NSW Upper House.
 The council, for most of its 130 years a chamber of privilege and life-long
appointments, has survived repeated calls for its abolition and even a
referendum on its future as late as 1960.
  The Wran Government introduced the greatest reform of the council in 1978
by making it elected by popular franchise.
  The reform continued last year, when council members gained salary parity
with Legislative Assembly MPs and could devote their energies full time
to Parliamentary duties.
  `Geriatrics'
  Now, a select committee has proposed a system of five standing committees
for the council, a reform described last week by the committee's chairman,
Mr Ron Dyer, as one of the most significant developments in the council's
history.
  Mr Dyer, a Labor member of the council since 1979, admitted that council
members could make a greater contribution for their $43,098 salary.
 "In the past, the council was called a house of geriatrics and a gentlemen's
club," he said.
  "While there might have been some truth in this criticism, now that all
the members are full time and being paid on parity with Lower House members,
they ought to be working full time, but it is probably true to say they
are not sufficiently occupied at the moment.
  "The House needs to find a role, and the most effective way is by the 
committee system."
  A former Liberal member of the council, Mr Lloyd Lange, called for a
committee system in 1980 but it was not until last year that the idea was
embraced by the ALP.
  The Premier, Mr Unsworth, then Government leader in the council, set up
the select committee, a fact Mr Dyer believes will help its passage through
Cabinet.
  The Dyer committee has recommended the immediate introduction of four
standing committees, covering subordinate legislation and deregulation,
State progress, social issues and country affairs, and a fifth committee 18 
months later to scrutinise legislation to ensure that civil liberties are not
infringed. 
  The report says the Australian Senate's committee system is comprehensive,
respected and acknowledged as having been responsible for revitalising
that chamber.
  It says the committees would give the Legislative Council greater relevance
and effectiveness, enhanced respect and greater sense of involvement by
members with contemporary issues and government business.
  "They won't obstruct government operations but complement them and give
the public input to policy before it finishes up in legislation," Mr Dyer
said.
  The select committee also recommended an expansion of the Public Accounts
Committee, the Legislative Assembly watchdog, to include Upper House members.
  The new joint committee should be required by law to examine at least one
statutory body in detail every six months, it said.  The choice should be
random to act as an incentive to good management of statutory bodies.
  Mr Dyer said the extra costs of the committees would be a "very modest
$1 million".
                                      
