The face of terror 1986 By  Frank Walker THE hit women - more deadly than any man  

The face of terror 1986 is female.  Women have taken over Europe's terrorist
groups and they are deadlier than the male.
  The cold-bloodedness of a spate of murders, bombings and maimings carried
out by women over the past few months has shocked Europeans.
  West German police chiefs have responded by instructing recruits: "Shoot
the women first".
  Three weeks ago in Paris, Georges Besse, head of the Renault car firm,
was walking home and was just 50 metres from his front door.
  Two women jumped out from the shadows.  One held a sub-machine gun to
cover the street and the other shot 58-year-old Besse three times - in
the chest, shoulder and head.
  French police launched a nationwide hunt for two of France's most wanted
terrorists - Nathalie Menigon, 29, and Joelle Aubron, 27.  Both are leaders
and chief executioners in France's extreme left terror group, Action Directe.
  The shooting had remarkable similarities with a terrorist execution in
the West German capital Bonn a few weeks earlier.
  Gerold von Braunmuehl, a top official in the Foreign Ministry, was leaving
a taxi outside his home when three masked people slid out of a car over
the road.
  One covered the street with a machine gun, while the others calmly walked
over to von Braunmuehl.  One guarded the other's back while the killer
pumped bullet after bullet into von Braunmuehl. 
  Police believe the killer was either Barbara Meyer, 38, or Inge Viett,
42, a former kindergarten nurse and one of Germany's most wanted terrorists.
  Women have been part of the terrorist scene in Europe from the early days
of the notorious Baader-Meinhof gang of the 1970s.
  Ulrike Meinhof was a campaigning journalist until she took to more direct
action and, with Andreas Baader, embarked on a bombing and shooting spree
across Europe that left more than 100 police in hospital and one judge dead.
  Meinhof hanged herself in jail.  Baader and his girlfriend, parson's daughter
Gudrun Ensslin, committed suicide in jail after an attempt to free them
by hijacking a Lufthansa plane ended in failure at Mogadishu, the capital
of Somalia.
  After their deaths in 1977 Europe breathed a sigh of relief.  The experts
claimed the problem had been "solved".
  But a new generation, mostly women, now runs the terrorist cells, known
in West Germany as the Red Army Faction, in France as Action Directe and
in Italy as the Red Brigades.
  "These people are stronger and the new ones seem to be only interested
in killing," said Alexander Prechtel, of the Federal Prosecutor's Office
in Bonn.
  There is a hard-core of around 20 killer commandos, more ruthless and better
organised than the Baader-Meinhof gang.
  Of the 18 most wanted terrorists in West Germany, 11 are women.
  But what drives them to commit their acts of terror?
  Dr Henri Giraud, psychiatrist to the Paris courts, said: "The traditional
role of women is being turned upside down and female terrorists - like all
beginners - are unusually zealous.  The want to expropriate male power.
Paranoia produces an inhuman calmness ... Menigon and Aubron killed Georges
Besse the way they would break a vase."
  Terrorists shared common characteristics, he said:
  They all came from upper middle-class homes.
  They all had good educations and had embarked on a career when they turned
to terrorism.
  Nearly all the women seemed to have met a man already involved in the
terrorist "radical chic" scene before they got into it themselves.
  Many had unsatisfying childhoods - long, silent frustration surrounded
by affluence.
  ANGELIKA SPEITEL, a green-eyed, 34-year-old blonde, is the first female
terrorist to speak about life in the Red Army Faction.
  "Everybody wanted to be very cool," she said.  "In reality we were all
very scared but we would never have admitted that to each other.
  "There was always a bit of homesickness, a need for love.
  "There was never any love among the members. You can't have actions in
your head and love someone at the same time.  You have to have a hate, otherwise
it wouldn't work."
  Speitel was captured in 1978 in a shoot-out with police.  One officer was
killed.  Whether she or another terrorist fired the fatal shot is still unclear.
She was wounded in the leg.
  She was sentenced to life imprisonment.  In a recent interview inside
her Cologne jail with a German magazine she gave a rare glimpse of the
psychology of the terrorist.                               
  She admits it is hard to speak about her "family", her fellow terrorists.
In 1981 she went on a hunger strike in Cologne jail to join terrorists
kept in another jail.
  "I was afraid of dying.  I was dying a little more each day.  But I thought
if I didn't join the hunger strike then I will be forever alone in this
cell."
  For two years Speitel was in solitary confinement.  She was considered
too dangerous to mix with the other prisoners.  She tried to kill herself.
It was the prison chaplain who finally got her to talk.
  For months she kept throwing him out of her cell. Then she started shouting
at him, launching a tirade against society, the prison, the Church, anything
that came to mind.  The chaplain just sat and listened.  
  After a while the revolutionary dogma sounded very thin.  She realised
she knew nothing about fascism or imperialism apart from the slogans she
shouted.  She started talking about herself.
  She was angry about the class system which she felt kept her family down
- her mother worked in a shop, her father was a skilled worker.  When she
was 20 she moved into a commune in Stuttgart.
  She married Volker Speitel, an unhappy man who dabbled in radical politics.
When they split up, she moved in with a group of men involved in organising
terrorist acts.
  In 1976 she was introduced to Peter Boock, one of the RAF commandos. "He
struck me as the man I had been waiting for.  His innocent brown eyes -
I thought I have to be careful with him.
  "When I met Boock I had this incredibly good feeling - I felt I had at
last decided to join the fight for freedom.  I felt I had freed myself."
  She went underground with Boock but the affair lasted only three weeks.
Then she fell into the routine of the group.
  "Emotions had to be suppressed. They kept on asking me why I was laughing
or crying.  They said I had to have a reason.  I suppressed laughing and
crying from then on.  
  "They were constantly talking about my readiness to join the actions. 
In the first few years I was always ashamed that I wasn't ready to join
in.  I would tell them I wanted to, that I wanted to get the prisoners out
of the jails.  I just didn't want to think how we would actually go about
it.  I was inhibited. 
  "Only those who were actually going to do the action were allowed to hold
the floor.  The others would say I didn't really want to join in.  I did,
but when it came to getting up that morning I just couldn't.  When they
came for me I was still lying in bed. 
  "I started to cut myself off from the others.  I felt so alone.  But I
wasn't allowed to talk to anyone else.  When they found I had talked to
the cook in a hotel or gone to a disco by myself all hell broke loose. 
They questioned me for hours."
  Her job was to arrange the hideouts.  She took part in the planning of
the murders of the bank chief Jurgen Ponto, and employers' leader Hans Martin
Schleyer.  After the suicide in jail of the terrorists Baader, Meinhof and
Ensslin many of the group wanted to quit.  They realised they wouldn't change
the world with their actions.                       
  "But we couldn't leave.  The others were all watching us.  We didn't even
dare talk about doubt, wounds, aches and feelings.  It was a living 
death.
  "It was a time of immaturity for a lot of us.  We didn't know what life
and death was. It was a frenzy, an addiction which went too far."
  Speitel now lives with a group of female prisoners and is learning to
be a seamstress.          

 INGE VIETT AGE: 42  

NATIONALITY: West German.
BACKGROUND: Former kindergarten nurse, member of Baader-Meinhof and founder
of the Second of June terrorist movement.
  Viett is West Germany's most wanted woman terrorist and has been on the
run for 10 years since she made a spectacular escape from prison in West
Berlin.  
  Viett had strong links with the Carlos organisation and the People's Front
for the Liberation of Palestine.  Her release from jail was one of the demands
made by Palestinian terrorists who hijacked an Air France jet at Entebbe
airport in Uganda before they were gunned down in the Israeli rescue operation.
  
