My captains courageous  

A ROSY aura has been manufactured in recent times about the magic of leadership
in cricket.
  Ever since a committee known as the Board of Control for Cricket in the
first place, about 1912, and the Cricket Board, which name evolved during
the presidency or influential stages of Sir Donald Bradman, mainly inspired,
I suspect, from the feelings of disdain and distrust engendered in the
maestro's mind as a result of two memorable brushes he had with it, about
14 or 15 men in the most part miles removed from active on-field experience
in cricket have enjoyed the right of choosing Australia's captain.
  Under such a system it became, during my time, little more than a lucky
coincidence if the board's darling hit it off happily with the players.
  My first experience of leadership in first class cricket was expertly turned
on by Alan Kippax, one of the really great NSW batsmen of all time.
  No local batsman has threatened to surpass him in style and effectiveness
since his retirement in 1934 and who have moved into the same sphere of
competency.
  His contribution was to mould the young NSW Shield side, destitute of
its stars to a mass exodus in 1927-28 which saw great names like Warren
Bardsley, Charlie Macartney, Charlie Kelleway, Hunter Hendry, Tommy Andrews,
Johnny Taylor and Arthur Mailey disappear forever from the game. 
  It needed a highly popular man to hold the deserted fort - a man of
unsurpassed ability in the field of play where examples in batting, bowling,
fielding and acceptable behaviour had to be expounded to a team of new
recruits.  
  Referring to the team, which he led lovingly, as his Portuguese
Army, Kippax carried his job faithfully and skilfully.
  That he was able to turn out men like Archie Jackson, Don Bradman, Stan
McCabe, Jack Fingleton, Syd Hird, Hughie Chilvers and Bill O'Reilly bears
such respect for him that there's nothing more to be said of a man whose
memory must always be revered in this State.
  My first international captain, Bill Woodfull, made easily the greatest
impact upon me at a time when Australia was universally aware that never
before had an Australian cricket captain been called upon for level-headed
leadership in a time of cricket insanity.
  As my captain in the bodyline season, when cricket went mad, Woodfull won
my undying respect and that of every team-mate who faced the music with
him.
  To give you a sidelight of this man of substance, I stress that he was
the son of a Victorian country padre who had taken a leading part in a highly
controversial sectarian flame-up which had darkened many a national horizon
in eastern Australia where sectarianism had been rampant since the bellicose
Prime Ministership of Billy Hughes throughout the two conscription campaigns.
  As a young well-educated man of Hibernian lineage, I had fairly
well-developed ideas on all the kindred topics of that troubled time.
  But it was with almost total disbelief that I found William Maldon Woodfull
to be a man of the strongest possible character who never ceased to treat
everyone of us with the utmost personal respect.
  So much so indeed that he was even prepared to head each interested one
of us off in the direction of his appropriate church on Sunday mornings
on tour.
  He was as brave, I reckon, as Horatius who held the bridge across the
Tiber.
  Twice he batted right through an Australian innings when lesser men about
him fell like ordinary mortals. 
  In Brisbane in 1928 he watched all his batting supports disappear like
flotsam and jetsam in a fast running stream to remain unconquered for 30
in a total of 66.
  Jack White, England's slow left-handed bowler renowned for accuracy in
length and direction, collected 4-7 in which bag Don Bradman's name, listed
at number five, appeared caught Chapman bowled White one.
  The other immortal occasion happened in Adelaide when Woodfull batted
through the second innings total of 193 for 73 not out.
This after suffering one of the most savage body blows ever when a whack
across the heart laid him low and served as one of the two explosive incidents
which set that fatal Test alight.
  In the wake of the puerile to-ing and fro-ing which went on in the 
ensuing war of words which culminated in our Board of Control pulling 
down its colours and retreating in confusion, Woodfull's composure and public 
respect were completely unparallelled before or since.
  I regard it as one of my greatest cricket possessions to have been a close
associate of such an inspiring mate in those hours of trial.  
  By comparison with him, all others, I honestly believe, pale into 
insignificance.
  Don Bradman's name comes constantly to the fore when captaincy of class
is being discussed and probably quite rightly so.
  But there were one or two things hard up against his "duck house" which 
will remain forever as potent arguments to be ranged up in criticism by
intelligent researchers.
  First was the dropping of Clarrie Grimmett at the start of Bradman's
captaincy reign in 1936-37 when, as an Australian selector and 
fledgling captain, he allowed the best spinner the world has seen, a 
point established beyond doubt a few months previously in South Africa, to 
vanish from the Test scene.
  The other was when four of his teamsmen, Stanley Joseph McCabe, Leslie
O'Brien Xavier Fleetwood-Smith, Leo Patrick O'Brien and William Joseph
O'Reilly, went humiliatingly before a sectarian junta of the Board of Control
meeting secretly in Melbourne to face a maliciously evil charge of
insubordination. 
  Each one of my three mates would gladly have welcomed some friendly gesture
from our young captain as we lined up for that painful afternoon with hate
in our hearts.
  I have seen leadership fortunes ebb and flow right from the time of Warwick
Armstrong, and I got to know men like Joe Darling, Hughie Trumble, Clem
Hill, Monty Noble and Syd Gregory who filled the breach before that mountain
of a man.
  There have been many since who have carried out their jobs sufficiently
and successfully, like Richie Benaud and Ian Chappell, and some whose names
will drop through the bottom of the basket without leaving a trace, but
each has been chosen by a band of men whose right to name a leader has never
yet been questioned.
  A recent ploy of theirs to assist in making decisions about blossoming
capacities has been to send a band of men on a lightning visit to India,
there to cement the spirit of comradeship and hone the skills of leadership.
  Kim Hughes did it last season and, returning amid a media fanfare of
trumpets, collapsed in a heap at the end of the Brisbane Test against New
Zealand.
  To bolster Allan Border's ego he too went off to India after having shown
frightening signs of succumbing to strain on a tour of New Zealand last
summer.
  For moral support a retired captain, Bob Simpson, accompanied him in
a cunning sort of wet-nurse capacity.
  Whether this will prove to have been an inspired move or not remains to
be seen, but I draw your attention to the fact that the selectors have sailed
into that India tour attack with their scalpels wreaking even before our
England invasion has got fairly underway.
  Oh, for another Bill Woodfull to put pride into our top team and at the
same time clear the dressing room of all superfluous impedimenta presently
contained therein.

