... And the post-war giants name their best skippers. By Brett Thomas  

NSW Cricket Association president Alan Davidson, who played in 44 Tests
between 1953 and 1963, said there have been only two standout captains in
his time - Lindsay Hassett and Richie Benaud.
  "I think Richie was the best mainly because our careers went side by side
from schoolboy days," he said.
  "I understood him and he understood me.  It was always very easy to play
with him."
  Davidson gives Hassett the credit for moulding him as a player during his
first tour of England in 1953.
  "I will always have a very vivid recollection of Lindsay during that tour,"
he said.  "He had a wonderful understanding of a young player.
  "He was only a little man - but he was very big on understanding."
  Blockbusting batsman Keith Stackpole, with 43 Tests under his belt, has
no doubts when it comes to his choice as the best.
  "Ian Chappell was the best I ever played under, then Bill Lawry and Bobby
Simpson in that order," he said.
  "I rate Ian the best because his style of captaincy suited me.  We would
both rather win a match than have it peter out into a dull draw.
  "Bill was more of a defensive captain but he showed the young fellows the
right attitude although he didn't have quite the same material as Ian.
  "And Simmo was a great inspiration because he was always so terribly
energetic."  
  Channel 9 commentator Bill Lawry also names Richie Benaud as the best ever
- with Ian Chappell second.  He would not name a third.
  "Richie was a tremendous captain," he said.  "He was the first of the
modern captains to really appreciate what was needed in modern cricket.
  "The series in which he captained Australia against the West Indies in
1961 started a tremendous boost for cricket.
  "He has done a fantastic amount for both Australian and world cricket
and I've never seen or played with anyone better.
  "Ian Chappell had a tremendous record as a captain and a player and,
statistically, he was also one of the best.
  "His own natural ability shone through and he always led from the front."
  Cricket commentator Richie Benaud said there were only two standout Australian
captains he's seen - Keith Miller and Ian Chappell.
  "Keith was captain of NSW and although he never captained Australia at
Test level I still consider him the best, with Ian," he said.
  "They are the top two - all the others are of about equal standard.
  "The reason they were so good is because they had imagination apart from
their skill and leadership qualities.
  "They had a very good knowledge of the game and were always willing to
take a gamble."

