One week to T day By Kevin Norbury, Megan Jones and Ross Brundrett  

THE State Government has just five days to stop gay rights activist Alison
Thorne returning to the classroom.
  Legal sources say the government is bound by the Equal Opportunity Board's
ruling that Ms Thorne be reinstated as a classroom teacher.
  But if the government appeals to the Supreme Court before Parliament rises
next Friday, it will gain time to "change the rules".
  Ms Thorne's return to teaching is backed by her union, the Technical Teachers
Union of Victoria.
  But school bodies and other community groups doubt she will be accepted
at any school.
  On Thursday, the Equal Opportunity Board ordered the Education Ministry
to take the necessary steps to appoint Ms Thorne to a technical school
from January 1.
  But the Premier, Mr Cain, said his Government had an obligation to parents
not allow Ms Thorne to teach children 16 and under.
  He said Ms Thorne's return to the classroom would undermine the Victorian
education system, and the Government would not let this occur.
  A senior government legal source said the Government would have to amend
the Equal Opportunity Act or the Teaching Service Act if it wanted to block
Ms Thorne's return.
  Ms Thorne, 27, was withdrawn from classroom duties at Glenroy Technical
School three years ago after she spoke, on Derryn Hinch's 3AW program, in
favor of lowering the age of consent.
  She was transferred to an administrative job in the Education Department's
regional office.
  In July last year, Ms Thorne lodged a discrimination complaint against
the Education Department - now the ministry.
  A lawyer working on equal opportunity cases said yesterday that once the
government lodged an appeal, the reinstatement order would be held in suspense.
   An amendment could then be in force by the time the appeal was heard.
  If the Government does not appeal, Ms Thorne will re-start her teaching
career in the new year, most likely at Tottenham Technical School, or back
at Glenroy.
  Back in November, 1983, she was waiting to transfer from Glenroy to
Tottenham, where she had been promoted.
  How she would be received now at Tottenham Tech, the school wasn't about
to say.
  Staff and the school parent's club were tight-lipped about the possibility on
Friday.
  But sources close to Glenroy Technical School say she would not be welcome
back there.
  They said the school was still reeling from the media attention it copped
when Ms Thorne was removed from teaching.
  The school's deputy principal, Mr Barry Armstrong, yesterday refused to
 comment on the possibility of Ms Thorne's return.
  Glenroy Tech teacher Mrs Sonia Rutherford told the Sunday Press that
the school "was angry with Hinch's involvement at the school and we do not
want to get involved with the media again."
  Jan Dillow, president of the Technical Teachers Union of Victoria, confirmed
that Ms Thorne was officially designated to Tottenham Tech.
  "But it is up to her which school she returns to," Ms Dillow said.
  Sources said Glenroy Tech, and a number of other technical schools, was
already over-supplied with teachers.
 Ms Dillow said the Department of Education looked at enrolment figures
at the beginning of each school year.
  If the figures were "over-establishment", or there were more teachers
than department ratios permitted, teachers were transferred to other suitable
schools in the area, if possible.
  If there were not enough jobs to go round, a colleague would lose their
job or be transferred to accommodate Ms Thorne if she is allowed to take
up her option at Glenroy Tech.
  Ms Dillow endorsed the Equal Opportunity Board's directive that Ms Thorne
be put back into the class room.
  "It was our policy that Alison be reinstated," she said.
  
