Breath Tests Illegal  

Queensland Law Society has suggested the State Government's new breath testing
campaign could be illegal.
  This follows a stepped-up police blitz on drink-drivers - incorporating
a trial of the new campaign called the Reduce Impaired Driving plan.
  Police stopped about 300 drivers in a crackdown in Woodridge and Beenleigh
on Friday night.
  Thirty of them will face drink charges.
  A law society statement yesterday backs claims by leading Brisbane lawyers
the Cabinet-backed RID plan is unlawful.
  Society president Elizabeth Nosworthy's statement said:
  "The law is not clear about the circumstances under which a police officer
may stop a motorist and administer a breath test.
  "The law society believes it is important the law be clarified both for
the protection of the motorist and of the individual police officers involved.
  "If the Government proposes to go ahead with its RID program, the society
believes the Traffic Act should be amended to clearly state the rights of
the police and the motorist."
  Police intend pressing ahead with the RID trial.
  Brisbane Traffic Branch chief Cal Farrah said the trial was being conducted
quietly with only half a dozen men. 
  Supt Farrah said they would continue to pull up motorists at random,
anywhere in the city and suburbs, and request to examine licences.
  The procedure was that, if liquor could be smelled, the motorist would
be asked to leave a vehicle and step on to the footpath where police would
continue to talk to him.
  If other signs were present that the motorist could be under the influence,
a breath specimen would be requested.
  Supt Farrah said motorists last week has cooperated fully with police.
  But some police have grave doubts about the legality of the RID methods.
  They want the law changed to give police the right to breath-test at
their own discretion, without any of the mandatory provisions of the Traffic
Act.
  These proclaim either a traffic offence has to be committed, positive
indications have to be present that a driver could be under the influence
or there has been an accident.
 Police cases have been lost where people have refused to blow and later
claimed they had been stopped for no lawful reasons.
  A leading Brisbane lawyer said police apparently were being pushed into
bending the law to obtain convictions.
  It would amount really to a serious conspiracy," the lawyer said.
  He said police could legally stop a driver for a licence check.
  But the normal provisions would still apply on the requirements 
necessary before police could legally require a breath test.
  A spokesman for Police Minister Bill Gunn said the Government had legal
advice that the law would not have to be changed for the RID campaign.
  "Our advice is that spot checking is not illegal," the spokesman said. 
  He said that before the campaign proceeded some administrative difficulties
had to be worked out, such as manpower needs.

