Move Over Bondy Iain Murray at the helm By Mark Oberhardt  

  Destiny seems to have dictated that Australian sailing's hulk Iain Murray
would one day be the nation's best known skipper.
  Murray, now 28, has been a champion sailor for most of his life.  Now
he is on the verge of becoming an international superstar.
  That's not really surprising in an island continent.  Yachting has become
one of Australia's high profile competitor sports.
  But, as is so often the case with sports in Australia, our sailing heroes
are relatively unknown in the rest of the world.
  That changed somewhat in 1983 when Australia II took the America's Cup,
making key members of the team such as Alan Bond, Ben Lexcen and John Bertrand
household names.
  The three became national heroes overnight.
  The public's adulation of Bond, Lexcen and Bertrand must have irked Murray.
After all, he was six times world champion in the flying 18ft skiff - the
world's fastest monohull.
  Murray found he may have been big news in yachting circles, but his name
meant nothing to the average Australian.
  All that is about to change as - with the backing of West Australian
multi-millionaire Kevin Parry - Murray is poised to push the Australia
II heroes into the cupboard of yesterday's men.
  Parry has poured $20 million into his challenge for the Cup and, with
Murray's help, the dream of upsetting Bond could be realised.
  After Bond's Australia II won the 1983 challenge in Newport; Rhode Island,
and they unscrewed the America's Cup from its pedestal in the New York Yacht
Club for the first time in 132 years, it seemed the same team would be on
hand to defend the trophy off Fremantle.
  But skipper John Bertrand soon left to pursue an individual career as
a motivational guru.
  Murray had been skipper of the ill-fated Advance in Newport - a boat
so ponderous it was known to one and all as The Dog.
  When The Dog was eliminated, stripped and virtually abandoned on the
Newport waterfront, Murray and his crew took over the more competitive
Challenge II from Victoria - also eliminated, but a much faster boat.
  Right up until Australia II's final series against Liberty, Murray and
his boys gave the Aussie challenger the vital match racing practice she
so badly needed.
  As the dramatic final series moved to its breathtaking climax, Murray
and Challenge II were always on the edge of the course, lending moral support.
  Naturally, when Bertrand split, Murray thought he might have some sort
of inside running with the Bond syndicate.
  Not so, Bond snubbed one of the world's best sailors and told him he was
not wanted aboard.
  Bond's monumental mistake was Kevin Parry's gain.
  Parry, a Perth multimillionaire, saw the commercial capital Bond had
made from his America's Cup victory and thought his own burgeoning business
empire could do with a bit of the same.
  He and Murray got together and the Taskforce '87 syndicate was formed.
  Parry promised vast funds.
  Murray promised his genius and demanded complete control.
  He got it and the Kookaburra saga was born.
  Murray is a complex combination of talents.  He is a superb sailor.
  And he is a great organiser - he was a successful businessman in his
early 20s.
  He designed the fastest single-hull boats in the world - space-age-
18-footers which careered over Sydney Harbor at more than 30 knots.
  Parry had the man he needed to topple the world of 12 metre sailing.
  Murray formed a design partnership with young West Australian John Swarbrick
and former America's Cup designer Alan Payne as advisor.
  They came up with the first Kookaburra, a benchmark for Kookas II and
III - currently scaring the pants off the world's best sailors in Fremantle.
  They harnessed, without the US parent company's knowledge and with the
compliance of the Australian subsidiary, the world's most advanced yacht
computer system.
  And Murray and his boys practised.  Boy, how they practised.  Two years
of hours on the water each day, a spartan regimen, supervised diet, dawn
road runs and calisthenics.
  Now it is all beginning to pay off.
  When Murray went to the 12 metres, there were snide remarks about it being
a long way from blowing away the opposition of Sydney Harbor in an 18 footer
to the robust 25 knot Fremantle Doctor and a 30 tonne yacht.
  But a lot of people forgot Lexcen - then Bob Miller - had made his mark
in 18-footers.
  Twenty-five years ago he, like Murray, was world champion and his designs,
notably Taipan and Venom, revolutionised the class.
  A few weeks ago, before last week's first defender series began, most
people thought the Bond syndicate's $15m effort to hold the Cup would sail
straight to the final series.
  But in the opening races, Kookaburra III, skippered by Murray, has laughed
at Ben Lexcen's pride, Australia IV, and walloped the current world 12
metre champion Australia III by nearly four minutes - a huge margin.
  Parry's second string yacht Kookaburra II, sailed by Western Australia's
Peter Gilmour, also beat Australia III and went down to Australia IV only
after a fouled spinnaker set wrecked her chances.
  Suddenly Murray is the toast - and the worry - of the yachting world.
  The shy, almost retiring, Murray takes it in his stride.  Like any racehorse
trainer used to dealing with the media, he trots out such lines as "We'll
take them one at a time" or "There's a long way to go".
  But Murray admits he is pleased with the way the boats are going.
  "It's always good to get some runs on the board, otherwise you are looking
at interpretation rather than fact," he says.
  "Now we can say the boats are good and that is fact.  It was always at
the back of our minds that we may have been kidding ourselves.  Well, now
we know what we can do."
  Win, lose or draw, Murray will be around in topclass yachting for many
years to come.
  "Sailing is my life.  The more I get into boat design the more it pleases
me," he says.
  Murray is a sailing natural and from the time he began crewing Flying
Ants out of Sydney's Middle Harbor Sailing Club he showed outstanding
potential.  
  By the time he was in his early teens, Murray had designed his own Cherub
with which he snared the national championship.  He transferred to 12ft
skiffs where he again he won national titles.
  By 17, he had moved up to 18s and was world champion.
  It was his six world 18ft titles which put him on the top, but to show
he wasn't a one-trick pony he took out the 1984 world Etchell titles.
  Now he could add the America's Cup to his formidable achievements.
  "Sometimes I have to pinch myself to make certain it's not a dream. 
Only two years ago I was sitting in a bar in Hawaii trying to talk Toby
Richardson into building a 12 metre for Kevin Parry," he said.
  Those two years have brought a lot of changes for Murray, but in the next
three months the die will be cast.
  Somehow destiny seems to give an inkling that Murray will be there next
January when it comes to the showdown.

