Gaslights May Return To North Terrace MP bids to restore the grandeur By William Reschke  

  The statue of the nude Venus on North Tce may soon again be viewed in
gaslight by the gentlemen of the Adelaide Club.
  In an earlier Adelaide, the members' glowing cigar ends at the club windows
drew as much scandalised comment as the statue.
  But not for Venus alone is the new move to gaslight.
  It is a bid by Mr Legh Davis, MLC, to recapture the spirit and classic
grandeur of our boulevard.
  Mr Davis, the Opposition spokesman for the arts, considers the North
Tce precinct - "our kilometre of culture" - as an important attraction
for visitors to the city.
  "Adelaide's streets were gaslit for 50 years, from 1863 to the outbreak
of World War I in 1914," he said yesterday.
  "Elegant Windsor design gas lamps, imported from England, were used
in the city in those days.
  "A Sydney company, Australian Gas Light Company, is selling an accurate
hand-made reproduction of these lights.
  "The gas lights would be placed on both sides of the terrace between East
Tce and the Railway station.
  "They would provide effect lighting rather than illumination," Mr Davis
said.
  Old world charm, however, would not extend to the lamplighter serenading
his way through parking meters to get the place lit up, Mr Davis added.
  High technology would see it done with electronic ignition.
  Mr Davis said benefits would far outweigh the cost of buying and running
the gas lights.
  Implementing the project would require co-operation between the City Council
and the SA Gas Company.
  Mr Davis has been encouraged by the positive response to his suggestion
from the Gas Company and Adelaide's Lord Mayor, Mr Jim Jarvis.
  Mr Jarvis believes it is a commendably simple way to achieve a most effective
result.
  "You know, tourists talk with me when they have seen our city and always
it comes back to this.
  "North Tce fascinates them as a grand boulevard in the classic European
style and it is our heritage," he said.
  "As long as we get back to a real representation of what it was, I would
support it," he said.
  "Government House still has the real thing.  They are superb," Mr Jarvis
said.
  Mr Davis said he would like another old custom to return.
  "The ambience of Adelaide, its Victorian architecture and wide streets
can be further enhanced by window boxes and greenery," he said.
  "Many cities overseas add color to their streets by encouraging the use
of window boxes.
  "It was pleasing here to see again the introduction of Floral Day for
the Festival of Arts, earlier this year.
  "The floral carpet in North Tce is a particular attraction of great appeal
to visitors at Festival time."
  "Sadly, a lack of expertise and volunteers have made it difficult to
hold an annual Floral Day.
  "Skills such as this should not be lost to the Festival City."
  "Adelaide's Mediterranean climate means we are ideally placed to show
off a wide range of flowers.
  "For example, many visitors to the recent International Heritage Rose
conference commented on the extraordinary quality of roses in SA ... as
good as anything in the world," Mr Davis said.

