Dynamic road to more success Enjoy life and become wealthy through `love' By Gail Williams  

  IF YOU love jogging, love yourself and love giving money away, you are
the sort of person who stands to make a fortune.
  According to publisher, Mr Colin Sisson, who is very close to becoming
a millionaire, the easiest way to prosper is by working at things you
love.
  Think of 10 of your greatest passions in life.  Mr Sisson, author of best
sellers Your Right To Riches and Rebirthing Made Easy, guarantees you
could make a fortune out of any one of your loves.
  So you love playing backgammon?  Mr Sisson would advise you to open up
a backgammon school.  If that sounds too simplistic, one hour with the
enthusiastic Mr Sisson and his wife, Kathryn, will have you thinking you
have the Midas touch, and the purse of Fortunatus.
  Before you rush off to register your needlepoint or TV-watching company,
you'd be well advised to read how Mr Sisson made a fortune.
  Mr Sisson took about an hour, punctuated regularly by the deep breaths
characteristic of this rebirthing technique, to explain how he abandoned
his carpet shampooing business and suddenly started raking in the dollars.
  No, not by sheer hard work, investing in the short-term money market,
or winning the lottery.
  Mr Sisson, 40, from New Zealand, made his money by not thinking about
making money, and by giving away what money he had.
  As a member of New Zealand's Special Air Service he found himself thinking
about the meaning of life on the battlefields of Vietnam during the 1968
Tet offensive.
  When he returned from Vietnam, he started up his own carpet shampooing
business, hoping to make a fortune.
  Hard work, long hours and a desperate desire to succeed, returned enough
money only to pay his wages - and little satisfaction.
  "I realised the problem was within myself." said Mr Sisson.  "I lacked
self esteem, which I eventually found through rebirthing techniques, martial
arts, philosophy, meditation and yoga - all things which  contributed to
my understanding that all riches are first created in the mind."
  Mr Sisson began interviewing wealthy people to find out the secret of
success and discovered they all shared similar characteristics.
  "I noticed they were all optimistic, they had faith in the future, faith
in themselves and a high self esteem.  They were all positive and really
good to be around, and all really nice people.
  "But the thing that got me was they showed integrity, and I began to
disbelieve the old myth that people get rich by ripping others off.  There
may be some who do, but they are not happy people."
  Mr Sisson said the amount of money a person has is no indication of wealth.
  "Money is only by-product of wealth he said.  "Wealth really is what's
happening in our minds and hearts.  I believe in the old adage of healthy,
wealthy and wise.  If a person chooses to be poor they are concord very rich.  If
a person is poor and resents it, that person is using energy unnecessarily.
There's more work involved in being poor than being rich."
  Mr Sisson draws on this philosophy in his weekly rebirth workshops he
holds in Exhibition Hall, Subiaco, and his prosperity seminars.
  Did he make his fortune from charging $115 per seminar and $25 per workshop?
  "No," he said.  "I don't really know where I get my money from.  Quite
often I get cheques in the mail where somebody's put a loveletter in,
saying they would like to make a contribution.
  "Tithing, the law of contribution, is one of the three laws of the 
right to riches.  The other two are the laws of attraction and accumulation.
  "Tithing is a very ancient principle of prosperity.  Whatever we give
away must come back to us - even money.
  "Whenever we contribute to prosperity, we must prosper also.  But the
idea is to give at least three-quarters to those who don't need it.
  "But we should give one-quarter to people who do need it.  This should
be done in the form of an idea - like my book - rather than money.
  By giving most of your tithings to folk who are already prosperous makes
a greater impact upon the general prosperity of the world.  They will use
the money you give them to build and create even more wealth in the world,
from which everyone benefits."
  According to Mr Sisson, the Perth millionaires he has observed also
operated on this principle.
  "People like Holmes a Court and Bond may not realise it, but they are
using these laws.  To me they are very happy, and the reason is because
they have a very high level of integrity."
 Mr and Mrs Sisson are doing a four-month stint in Perth running their
rebirthing workshops and prosperity seminars.  Rebirthing is a breathing
technique used to eliminate stress and promote relaxation.

