<subsample>
	<id> A43a </id>
	


	<source>  Sunday Tasmanian - 30 November 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Now is the time to plan for a new lease of life </h>
	

RETIREMENT today does not mean retiring from life, nor it should.
  For people embarking on this stage of life, completion of paid employment
can provide many opportunities.
  Often you can do a lot of things you simply didn't have time for before,
things such as travelling, playing sport, learning new skills, community
work and many more.
  Many have already achieved a degree of financial security.
  However, the economic climate has become much less hospitable to the
retiree and it is important for those approaching this period of their lives
to educate themselves in financial management.
  Otherwise, for all the vigour and enthusiasm they bring to their plans,
they may find themselves caught in the trap of declining income.
 So first - plan ahead.
  Some of the things you may consider prior to your retirement are:
  List all your assets which you will have on retirement, for example a
house, car and savings, and liabilities such as consumer credit contracts,
home mortgage and so on;
  Work out a current budget, estimating expenditure over a 12-month period
and other expenses such as a new car or holiday;
  Find out the amount of superannuation, pension and/or lump sum to which
you will be entitled and details of other amounts which you may receive
from maturing life assurance policies, long service leave etc, at retirement.
  Once you have worked out where you stand, it would be prudent for you
to consult an independent investment adviser to determine the best spread
of investments to meet your particular financial needs throughout retirement.
  There are many types of investments available and in examining these you
need to consider such factors as:
  Security - the degree of safety of your funds, how substantial is the
investment source, is your capital guaranteed or does value rise or fall
according to market sentiment, as for example property and share markets.
 How secure are the areas in which the organisation invests.?
  Income - is the investment income producing or, is it designed to provide
long-term capital gains as a hedge against inflation?  If it is income
producing, what rate is being offered?
  Marketability - can you cash in on your investment immediately you need
the money or is it placed over a fixed period. 


</subsample>
