<section>

<title> D: RELIGION </title>

<sample><id> D01 </id>

<note> 2032 words </note>

<source> Jesus today. Christology in an Australian context. </source>

<bl> By Gerald O'Collins </bl>

<h> 4  THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS </h>

In Chapter 3 I argued that Christology should centre on Jesus' dying and
rising. Back in Chapter 1 I pointed out the need to validate Christological
faith in its historical origins and development. That entails establishing
what we can about Jesus' life, death and resurrection. In this chapter I
plan to put together and run through some problems that could confront a
Christology centred around the paschal mystery. It is simply not possible
to raise all the issues. Let me select and concentrate on certain challenges
in the fields of history, faith and theology.

<h>1. History</h>

When faced with death, Jesus continued to maintain the validity of his message
and his certainty of being saved (Mark 14:25). He interpreted his self-giving
as a new covenant, which would be beneficial `for many' (1 Corinthians 12:23-5;
Mark 14:22-4). His male dis+ciples fled when he was arrested (Mark 14:27-8,
50; John 16:32), and an outsider took care of his burial (Mark 15:43). Jesus'
crucifixion challenged the inter+pretation of his coming death and certainty
about being saved that he had expressed at the last supper. Accord+ing to
the contemporary interpretation of Deuteronomy 21:23 (see the Qumran Temple
Roll 64:6-13 and Gala+tians 3:13), someone crucified for breaking the law
was understood to be cursed by God. But then the disciples began proclaiming
that God had raised Jesus from the dead (for example, 1 Thessalonians 1:10;
Acts 2:32; Romans 10:9). This proclamation was initiated by appearances
of the living Jesus (for example, 1 Corin+thians 15:5-8) and, secondarily,
by the discovery that his tomb was empty (Mark 16:1-8 and parallels).
  Apropos of the Easter appearances and the empty tomb, there are many problems.
No doubt it will stay that way till the end of time. Here I want to raise
and briefly respond to some questions, so as to illustrate what a
resurrection-centred Christology might have to tackle today.

<h>(a) The Appearances </h>

In discussing the appearances, it may be as well to start with the ingenious
`swoon theory', which H.E.G. Paulus floated in the last century and which
has enjoyed a number of variants in recent decades. Essentially the hypothesis
comes to this. Jesus did not die on the cross, but was taken down alive from
the cross, revived in the tomb, somehow got out and `appeared' to his
followers. In his novella The Man Who Died, D.H. Lawrence has Jesus coming
back in this way to his followers and then slipping off to Egypt to enjoy
conjugal relations with a priestess of Isis. Other versions of this `happy
ending' have Jesus going away to live with Mary Magdalene, as in The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail by Baigent, Leigh and Lincoln. Some Moslems claim
that, after escaping from the tomb, Jesus even reached India; at Srinagar
in Kashmir tourists can see a shrine that is alleged to be the place where
he was finally buried after really dying in old age.
  In The Anastasis (Shipston-on-Stour, 1982), Duncan Derrett suggests that
Jesus `entered into a self-induced trance' on the cross (p.45). Those who
buried him took him to be dead, but this `clinical death' was briefly reversed
before irreversible brain-death finally occurred. But he had made significant
use of his short-lived re+covery. For after he revived in the cold tomb
and had been helped out (apparently by some people watching at the tomb
and the `young man' of Mark 16:5-7), he was able to commission his disciples.
Shortly thereafter, as a result of his sufferings and crucifixion, he underwent
final brain-death. He had authorised his disciples to dis+pose of his corpse
by cremation, and they burnt it out+side the walls of Jerusalem. The ascension,
as recounted by Luke, was a `euphemism' for that cremation (pp.83,90).
  Out here in Australia, Barbara Thiering has also ad+vanced the theory that
Jesus did not die on the cross. Her account runs as follows. The vinegar (Mark
15:36) that Jesus was given contained some poison that would eventually have
killed him. However, he was placed alive in the tomb with the the  two
criminals crucified with him. One of these two men (whom Thiering identi+fies
as Simon Magus and Judas Iscariot) administered aloes to Jesus which caused him
to bring up the poison. His supporters smuggled Jesus out of the tomb. After
spending some years with the early Christian commun+ity, he then really died.
Finally, Thiering adds her own startling twist to the `swoon theory'. Jesus'
crucifixion, burial and escape from the tomb did not take place in Jerusalem
but in or around Qumran. 
  Against these different versions of the `swoon theory', it must be said
that their major `source', the New Tes+tament itself, contains not a shred
of hard evidence in their favour. The Gospels, St Paul and the primitive
Christian kerygma (which gets quoted in 1 Corinthians 15:3b-5, the early
speeches in Acts and elsewhere in the New Testament) agree that Jesus genuinely
died by cruci+fixion and was buried as a dead man (for instance, 1 Corinthians
15:4; Mark 15:37, 42-7). Other ancient sources corroborate this. The Jewish
historian, Flavius Josephus (AD 37-c.100), in his Antiquities 18:63-4 reports
that Jesus was crucified on the orders of Pilate. It seems that some Christian
or Christians revised this pas+sage in Josephus by adding material in praise
of Jesus, but at least the information about his execution seems to go back
to Josephus himself. In his Annals 15:44 (writ+ten in AD 112-113), the Roman
historian Tacitus ex+plains that the name `Christians' came from the founder
of their sect, Christ, who was executed by the `procura+tor' Pontius Pilate
during the reign of the Emperor Tiberius. In an obscure passage, the Babylonian
Talmud (Sanhedrin 43a) writes of Yeshu, who led some Israelites astray by
his magic, but was then `hanged on the eve of Passover'. These extra-biblical,
Roman and Jewish sources show little historical knowledge, but they indi+cate
no doubt whatsoever that Jesus genuinely died by execution. Like the passion
narratives in the Gospels, these other documents contain not the slightest
hint that Jesus was or could have been still alive when the execu+tioners
had finished with him.
  In the nineteenth century, David Friedrich Strauss (1808-74) cast many
doubts on the gospel story, but even so had no truck with the swoon theory.
He put his finger on another knockdown difficulty against any hypothesis
of a half-dead Jesus reviving in the tomb and then returning to his followers:
 
It is impossible that a being who had stolen half dead out of the sepulchre,
who crept about weak and ill, wanting medical treatment, who required
bandaging, strengthening and  indul+gence...could have given the disciples
the impression that he was a Conqueror over death and the grave, the Prince
of Life, an impression which lay at the bottom of their future ministry.
Such a resuscitation...could by no possibility have changed their sorrow
into enthusiasm, have elevated their reverence into worship.

Add too, the fact that neither the New Testament nor any other source provides
evidence for the post-crucifixion existence and activity of a Jesus who
was revived from apparent death. Derrett admits as much when he writes of
`the loud silence of the gospels and epistles' about Jesus' brief life after
his revival from clinical death (Anastasis,p.71).
  Before dismissing the whole `swoon theory' as bogus nonsense, we might
reflect briefly on the thinking be+hind it. Besides expressing a refusal
to accept that Jesus truly rose from the dead to a new, transformed life,
this theory serves to bring out the nature of historical cer+tainties and
a persistent desire that goes right back to the time of the apocryphal gospels.
  It is always open to anyone to deny facts that profes+sional scholars
and the general public agree on and correctly take for granted. An imagination
that does not bother to produce hard evidence for bold assertions can then
advance sensational claims and propose ingenious counter-stories. One could,
for example, make up a story about Julius Caesar not having been assassinated
in 44 BC. Someone else was killed in his place; he escaped to the Tiber
and took a trireme to Britain, where he cultivated vineyards and helped
to prepare the way for the eventual settlement of the Romans. Abso+lutely
speaking, this counter-story cannot be ruled out as impossible. But the
lack of evidence in its favour and the convergent proofs for the normally
accepted version of Caesar's untimely end make an escape-to-Britain hypothesis
so utterly implausible that it is not worth bothering about. Practically
every historian and biblical scholar would say the same thing about the
`swoon theory'.
  This theory, I suspect, is fed by a tendency that set in fairly early
among some Christians, and which a Cali+fornian friend of mine summed up
as follows: `When they ran out of things they knew about Jesus, they started
making up and writing down things they really didn't know.' Thus the canonical
Gospels knew of no witnesses to the very event of Jesus' resurrection itself.
The second-century Gospel of Peter 9:35 ff invents such witnesses. There
are so many limits and gaps in what we know about Jesus' life, death and
resurrection, that it is tempting to conjecture, fabricate and fill in details
that the real evidence does not support. In their variant of the `swoon
theory', R. Graves and J. Podro, for example, generously supply information
about `the extreme sul+triness of the weather' (which, together with the
spikenard ointment smeared on the shroud, helped to keep Jesus alive in
the tomb), and about the way he escaped:

The Roman soldiers, hired to stand guard, rolled back the stone at night
while their sergeant was asleep and tried to steal the ointment - which
was worth several years' army pay and could easily be sold in the brothels
of Caesarea. They found Jesus still alive, and the sergeant, when acquainted
with the surprising news, let him go; being subsequently bribed by Bunni
[= the name Graves and Podro give to Nicodemus] to say that the disciples
had removed the body. (Jesus in Rome, London, 1957,pp.12-13).

All of this suggests a novelist's anxiety to reconstruct a well-rounded
story, although one must be grateful that Graves and Podro do not indulge
a taste for cherchez la femme and arrange for Jesus to rendezvous with Mary
Magdalene or a priestess of Isis.
  At the end of the day, the `swoon theory' reduces the origin of Christianity
to a banal story about a bungled execution. In place of the mystery of Jesus'
true resurrec+tion from the dead, we are told that he had an incredibly
lucky revival from apparent death - a revival that his disciples later
misrepresented when they claimed that he had been `raised from the dead,
never again to revert to corruption' (Acts 13:34). The `swoon theory', by
grant+ing Jesus only a temporary respite from death after an extraordinary
unpleasant brush with crucifixion, makes the New Testament's language about
his glorious, new, incorruptible existence (for instance, 1 Corinthians
15:20 ff; Luke 24:26) simply incomprehensible or else a bold lie.
  To keep this section on the risen Lord's appearances down to manageable
proportions, let me next glance quickly at some other current
counter-explanations. The hypothesis that the disciples somehow hallucinated
the risen Jesus' appearances has been tried and found want+ing. Ian Wilson,
however, has recently returned to this hypothesis, arguing that

...it is possible that he [Jesus] prepared his disciples for his resurrection
using the technique that modern hypnotists call post-hypnotic suggestion.
By this means he would have effec+tively conditioned them to hallucinate
his appearances in response to certain pre-arranged cues (the breaking of
bread?), for a predetermined period after his death. (Jesus the Evidence,
London, 1984,p.141.)

Wilson supports his theory by gratuitously attributing such powers of hypnosis
to Jesus and throwing in an experiment in post-hypnotic suggestion on one
volun+teer who `was known to be a good hypnotic subject' (ibid. pp. 141
f). How on earth do we know that the disciples were all such good hypnotic
subjects?  What of Paul, who saw the risen Christ, but had enjoyed no contact with Jesus during the ministry and hence could not have been conditioned to hallucinate an Easter appearance in response to some pre-arranged cues?

</sample>


<sample><id> D02 </id>

<note> 2011 words </note>

<source> The force of the feminine. </source>

<bl> By Barbara Thiering </bl>

<h> 3   Sexism and fundamentalism </h>

The word `fundamentalism' has been introduced to the public in recent years
by journalists. It was applied first to the Muslim revolution, which revived
a traditional sexual code and grounded it in primitive Islamic theology.
Then, with the visit to Australia of the American Protestant preacher, the
Reverend Jerry Falwell, in 1982, the word was more correctly used for his
combination of biblical dogmatism with an absolutist attitude to moral values.
A group called `Toleration-a coalition against fanaticism' sprang into
existence in Sydney in reaction to his visit. In 1984 Jerry Falwell led
a significant faction in the US presidential election, and has been observed
to be moving towards a new kind of American established religion which
endangers the separation of Church and State.
  Originally, the word `fundamentalism' was used simply for an attitude
to the Bible. There is little doubt in the minds of most historians of
Christianity that it is a recent phenomenon, and one which is so at variance
with classical Chistianity that, if we were back in the days of orthodoxy,
it would have to be called a heresy. It came into existence in the late
nineteenth century, and from its inception flourished in the southern states
of the USA. After the First World War it became characteristic of Sydney
Protestantism, as its main weapon in the battle against Roman Catholicism.
The effect of fundamentalism was to give to the Bible the same sort of
authority, based on infallibility, which the Roman Catholic Church had declared
for the Pope in 1870. Both Protestants and Catholics were setting up an
intellectual authority against the invasions of scientific rational+ism,
but fundamentalism stepped right into the camp of science by claiming that
the factual statements of the Bible had the same kind of truth as scientific
descriptions, took priority over them, and were `proved' by the methods
of science.
  One reason why biblical fundamentalism flourished in Sydney was that a
form of it had been planted here from the beginning. In 1788 the Wesleyan
revival had thoroughly permeated the working classes in England, and it
was from their lowest levels that the convict founders came. The first
chaplain, the Reverend Richard Johnson, was appointed by the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel. In Manning Clark's words,

[h]is sponsors entertained great hopes for the success of his work, that
he would prove a blessing to lost creatures, and hasten the coming of that
day when the wilderness became a fruitful field, when the heathen would
put off their savageness, and put on the graces of the spirit. To assist
him the Society provided a library of tracts and books...In addition to
Bibles, Books of Common Prayer, and Psalters, Johnson took with him copies
of Osterwald on the necessity for reading the scriptures, Kettlewell's offices
for the penitent, copies of exercises against lying, of cautions to profane
swearers, of exhortions to chastity, of dissuasions from stealing, together
with the most fervent wishes from the board of the Society that the divine
blessing might go with him.

  The Bible was already a symbol of class struggle, and remained so for a
long time wherever there was a deep resentment against the ruling classes.
The historical circumstances meant that it was given an extraordinary position
here as the sole source of religious authority. The convicts and working-class
settlers were going to a place where they had no church, and they lacked
a sufficient sense of derivation from the Church in England to be able to
claim to carry its essence among themselves, unlike the Pilgrim Fathers
in North America. Thus, probably for the first time in its history,
Christianity was planted in a country on the basis of the Bible alone, rather
than on the Bible and the Church, the two traditional pillars.
  Further, the dependence on the Bible was held by people who were largely
illiterate, and made little connection between relying on it and reading
it. Thus began the tradition of making it a magic talisman, no different
from a cross or a set of rosary beads, an unsuitable basis on which to add
a belief, started in the early twentieth century, that its contents consisted
of rational propositions about the physical world. 
  In the United States, the emphasis was not so much on the Bible as a symbol
or magical object as on the Bible as a depository of Christian beliefs that
were said to be fundamental and unshakeable, something against which adherence
to religion could be measured. Its history has been traced by Gabriel Hebert in
his book Fundamentalism and the Church of God. Its formal phase began with
the publication by the Testimony Publishing Company of Chicago, Illinois,
between 1909 and 1915, of three million booklets free of charge to `every
pastor, evangelist, missionary, theological professor, theological student,
Sunday School superintendent, YMCA and YWCA secretary, in the English speaking
world, so far as the addresses of all these can be obtained'.
  The essentials of belief that were called fundamentals in these booklets
were emphatically Protestant; in fact Roman Catholicism was classed with
heresies. They included: the doctrine of the Atone+ment (that Christ died
vicariosly for sinners); the deity of Christ; the reality of hell and the
devil; the virgin birth of Christ; the second advent. The authority for
these was the Bible, said to be a revelation direct from God, infallible
and inerrant. The treatment of it which was then coming into use as a result
of both Darwinism and the new comparitive literature from the Ancient Near
East was condemned as fallacious if not wicked, because it implied that
the Bible was a record of human development in a particular place at a
particular time, a point of view which was said could not be held side by
side with a belief that it was a direct revelation from God in true form
for all time.
  Fundamentalism rapidly became a bad word, associated with bigo+try and
fanaticism, and in 1955 the Reverend John Stott said that he preferred in
its place the term `conservative evangelical'. This label was accepted,
and is still proudly worn by a very large section of the Protestant Church
in Sydney, especially the Anglicans. John Stott himself was among those
considered for the position of Archbishop of Sydney in 1982.
  In their original form, as stated in the series of booklets, the selection
of `fundamentals' had no precedent in the previous creeds of the Christian
Church. The doctrine of Atonement was of course a central tenet of the
Reformation, being one of its weapons against the temporal power of Rome,
for it meant that every person could gain salvation directly by identification
with Christ's death without the intermediacy of a priest. But its meaning
had always included admission into a community, which was entered by means
of the symbolic death of baptism. Without a strong emphasis on Church, the
idea of atonement simply becomes a piece of magical thinking, making no
sense, and this is the form in which these booklets teach it.
  A belief in the second coming of Christ was held in the first century
AD, when they were using a calendar dated from the creation of the world
which was about to reach the year 4000, and under contem+porary Pythagorean
influence they believed that a great crisis ought to happen in that year.
Once the Christian era replaced their calendar, the basis for belief in
a second coming was removed, and such expectations moved further and further
to the fringes of the Church.
  Doctrines such as the virgin birth, hell and the devil, were part of the
contemporary popular language of the hellenistic period, and were simply
accepted and to some extent refined by the Church; they never taught them
in opposition to accepted belief, as supernaturalists now try to do; miracles
are no longer a common assumption. Further, there never had been such a
doctrine of the Bible - infallible and inerrant - even in the Reformation. It
was not the detailed information that it contained, but its power as a means
of independence of priests, that made the Protestants hold to it. Luther
stood quite cheerfully in judgement upon it, selecting those parts of the
New Testament he liked and deriding others. The Apostles' Creed contains
no statement about the Bible. The attribution of infallibility to the Bible
seems to be a direct reaction to the doctrine of papal infallibility
promulgated in 1870. In both cases, the hardening of authority was a response
to a loss of actual power.
  The label `evangelical', now associated with fundamentalist belief, has
been removed from its original context of meaning. The evangelical revival
in eighteenth-century England was a recovery of fervour, aroused by the
powerful preaching of men like Wesley and Whitefield. Preaching the gospel
gives the word `evangelical', the gospel being a challenge to personal
commitment to the figure of Christ. Its meaning is discussed in the Bible,
but could be understood without it, being preserved in a continuing community.
The Bible became secondarily connected with the evangelical revival, because
it was the working classes in England who were aroused by it and given the
strength to stand up against the ruling classes, whose advantage was their
education. Schooled in the principles of the Enlightenment, they had reduced
religion to a rational formula which is certainly not found in the Bible.
But the Bible does contain the gospel, the good news, and so it became the
manual of the uneducated in their fight against cold rationalism. Now, however,
the word `evangelical' is used for a process of strict reasoning from an
assumption that the Bible is a lawbook containing a set of absolute
propositions. Enthusiasm and fervour are on the whole distrusted by the
Evangelicals, as shown by their reaction to the charismatic outbreak of the
1970s.
  The best-known product of biblical fundamentalism, still very much current
as a matter of legal, educational and sociological concern, is the doctrine
of creationism, which is opposed to the theory of evolution as an account
of the way species came into existence. The so-called `monkey trial' in
the United States in 1926 dramatised issues which are still being fought
out in their legislation and have now found their way here, with the growth
of fundamentalist schools as part of a new phase of private education. Children
are being taught that God created human beings directly in their present
form, and all species independently, and that it is a matter not only of
science but of personal salvation and moral wholeness that this should be
believed.
  The answer of academic biblical scholars to this and related questions
is derived from both theology and historical records. The accounts of the
creation and flood found in Mesopotamia in the second half of the
nineteenth-century show beyond doubt that they belong to the category of
myth. They are intertwined with the stories of gods, and are a kind of
primitive metaphysics: an attempt to talk about the nature of reality in
terms drawn from human experience. They picture the way things must have
been in the light of the way things are now; for example, since conflict 
between opposing forces leads to a creative synthesis, they pictured the 
mother goddess Tiamat fighting against the hero god Marduk and being 
defeated, with the result that the physical world came into existence. The 
Old Testament is using the same sort of language to put forward a different 
philosophical point of view: that the world is unified, entirely under the 
control of a single god, not the helpless victim of a cosmic dialectic. 
There is every reason to suppose that Genesis is consciously revising and 
purifying an existing creation story in the interests of monotheism and the 
observance of the sabbath. Its concern is with theology and ritual, not with 
natural science.
  Theology has also recognised the place of myth and symbol in theological
language. As soon as we use language at all, we are dealing in images and symbols,
not with things directly.  
                             
</sample>


<sample><id> D03 </id>

<note> 2006 words </note>

<source> Discovering Paul. The life and message of the Apostle Paul for today. </source>

<h> 4   Paul the Pastor </h>

The greatest problem facing the parish minister today is that of burn-out.
Beneath every minister's name-tag should read the words: `Caution: Ministry
is a health hazard!'
  Most ministers committed to God and to the care of the churches pay a
high personal price: the cost of caring.
 Jesus cared for people. He was the good shepherd, a pastor who cared for
them. He laid down his life for his sheep because he loved them. He called
Peter three times, `Do you love me? - Feed my sheep ... Feed my flock ...
Tend my lambs.'
  Ever since, men and women who have heard the call of Christ have undertaken
to be shepherds to the flock of God. They care for his sheep. They are his
pastors. The apostle Paul said that in order to help the church, God gave
to the church the gifts of apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors and
teachers. These pastor/teachers are the people we see day-by-day caring
for the church.
  But there is a cost in caring for the church and many faithful ministers
burn out in paying that price. In any battle, you can expect heavy casualties
among the front line troops. And pastors are in the front line of spiritual
battle.
  Ever since the beginning faithful men of God have become overwhelmed and
despaired. Elijah, after one of the most successful ministries ever in the
name of the Lord, was exhausted and, at the height of his popularity and
success, `walked a whole day into the wilderness. He stopped and sat down
in the shade of a tree and wished he would die. "It's too much, Lord," he
prayed. "Take away my life; I might as well be dead!"' Jeremiah and Peter
had similar experiences. In recent times a number of studies have been made
covering hundreds of pastors who have burnt out and left the ministry.
  It has been discovered there are a number of similarities among the burn-out
casualties. Those leaving the ministry or collapsing within it are usually
men in the mid-life age span, who do not have personal care shown to them
by the leaders of their denomination at the denominational headquarters;
mostly pastoring small congregations; mostly moving frequently from church
to church; and mostly with a theology that is at odds with what they were
taught in theological college.
  It is interesting to note that the apostle Paul had all of those same
similarities in his life and ministry.
  The causes are also identifiable in the examination of contemporary burn-out
victims: some pastors cannot provide the rugged individualism that is required
by the ministry with its variety of demands; some find their beautiful idealism
shattered by congregations that lapse into old ways and who resist change;
some find the financial pressures of a ministry too great and have to take
other work to supplement their income; and some lack the support of a spouse
who provides constant support in what is a very lonely job.
  Again it is interesting to note that the apostle Paul could be identified
with each of those causes. Consequently it is interesting to compare the
first and the twentieth centuries and to see what it was that enabled Paul
to cope with the cost of caring.

Paul and the pressures of pastoring
Recently I took a scoresheet that had been produced to help ministers discover
areas of stress in their lives today and then, using that scoresheet, I
carefully studied more than half of the New Testament examining both the
epistles of Paul and the accounts in Acts about him, paying special attention
to his speeches and personal comments in his writing.
  I identified a number of pressure points and a similar number of enabling
factors.
  The pressure points faced by the apostle from his own words and writing
are very similar to the causes of burn-out among contemporary ministers.

<h> 1. The physical dangers of his work </h>

Paul was both a preacher and a travelling missionary and as a result he
was open to all kinds of physical hardship, threat and hurt.
  I identified more than thirty occasions in his life, in descriptions of
events or in references through his writing, when he was under extreme physical
danger. While it is not possible to list them all in detail, the following
phrases give a very good picture of the physical danger involved in his
work:

The Jews met together and made plans to kill Saul, but he was told of their
plan. Day and night they watched the city gates in order to kill him.
  He ... disputed with the Greek-speaking Jews, but they tried to kill him.

Paul was well aware of the dangers he ran and he made frequent reference
to those dangers.
  He referred to these in his epistles, particularly when writing to the
church at Corinth where he had faced a number of difficult situations.
Following an attack upon his life, he reflected upon the dangers that he
constantly faced in these words:
  'My brothers, I face death every day!'
  Paul summed it up in one of the most famous paragraphs of any of his letters:

I have worked much harder, I have been in prison more times, I have been
whipped much more, and I have been near death more often. Five times I was
given the thirty-nine lashes by the Jews; three times I was whipped by the
Romans; and once I was stoned. I have been in three shipwrecks, and once
I spent twenty-four hours in the water. In my many travels I have been in
danger from floods and from robbers, in danger from fellow Jews and from
Gentiles; there have been dangers in the cities, dangers in the wilds, dangers
on the high seas, and dangers from false friends. There has been work and
toil; often I have gone without sleep; I have been hungry and thirsty; I
have often been without enough food, shelter, or clothing. And not to mention
other things, every day I am under the pressure of my concern for all the
churches.

<h> 2. The daily burden of the churches </h>

As a pioneer cross-cultural missionary Paul found even the physical strain
of establishing new congregations a great burden. New communities, new
languages, new customs, a new tent-making workshop, all must have been a
tremendous mental strain. But if you add to this the problems of being
rejected, of being physically assaulted and attacked, as well as the burden
of the young Christians who in their eagerness and sometimes wilfulness
perverted their new faith, it is easy to appreciate that daily burden of
`the care of all the churches.'
  Anybody who has travelled through central Turkey over some of the most
rugged mountainous terrain possible would be amazed at the physical stamina
that Paul and his companions showed. Yet that was just a small portion of
years of constant travelling in some of the most inhospitable countries
of the Mediterranean:

Paul and his companions sailed from Paphos and came to Perga, a city in
Pamphylia ... They went on from Perga and arrived in Antioch in Pisidia,
and on the Sabbath they went into the synagogue.

  Sometimes the joy over a congregation such as at Philippi must have balanced
up other congregations where there was constant strain and worry. Constantly
the inability of ordinary Christians to maintain a consistent quality of
Christian life ate into the very heart of Paul. That daily worry would be
enough to turn any man from his calling. Sexual immorality, a spirit of
pride and boastfulness, an inability to relate to other people, and the
temptation to always turn from the true path of the faith to accommodate
the pressures of the world were always the problems the young churches faced
and were at the centre of Paul's consistent care. In writing to the Galatians,
for example, Paul says: 'I am worried about you! Can it be that all my work
for you has been for nothing?... My dear children! Once again, just like
a mother in childbirth, I feel the same kind of pain for you until Christ's
nature is formed in you. How I wish that I were with you now, so that I
could take a different attitude toward you. I am so worried about you!'

<h> 3. The pressures of managing the church </h>

Although Paul didn't have a formal religious function, he did have a spiritual
oversight over a vast area and a large number of churches, ministers and
lay ministers. This involved people of different cultural and language
backgrounds, from the strictest of Jewish conservatism through to those
who had little or no religious belief prior to his contact with them.
  The only reason the missionary journeys were undertaken was because Paul
intended to undertake a routine visit of churches previously established.
  The pastoral epistles came down to us because Paul wanted to immediately
handle problems faced by the local congregations, to give them guidance
in their personal actions and to explain some of his teachings. In one sense
all of the epistles are 'pastoral' in that they are informing the church
on matters pertaining to the pastoral life of the people. Even the letter
to the Romans has behind it a very practical purpose: to introduce his plans
to visit them and then to go on, with their help, to evangelise Spain:

I have been wanting for so many years to come to see you ... I would like
to see you on my way to Spain, and be helped by you to go there, after I
have enjoyed visiting you for a while.

<h> 4. Theological conflict </h>

Paul's frequent theological conflicts and resultant pressures must have
made it difficult for him to continue at the pace he had established in
his ministry.
  The conflicts will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 7 when we consider
Paul as a philosopher. The first conflict we have already noted was with
the apostle Peter and other leaders of the church concerning the reception
of Gentiles into the church. Paul's viewpoint held sway and changed the
history of the church. A further area concerned continual debates with people
who belonged to other religions. He debated with the devotees of various
Greek and Roman gods, with animists, with magicians and the believers of
local superstitions. A further group were his own Jewish compatriots,
particularly the ultra-conservative Pharisees, who believed that every change
was a change for the worse. A final group consisted of some of the Jewish
Christians who wanted to emphasise the keeping of both the old covenant
with its food laws, cultural traditions, circumcision and Sabbath keeping,
along with the new covenant.
  There is an emotional, intellectual and physical price that comes upon
a person who is constantly engaged in having to defend the faith he believes.
Paul knew the burden of theological conflict.

<h>5. Cultural conflict </h>

The following passage indicates the way the Greeks did not like the way
Paul spoke or presented himself in public: 'Paul's letters are severe and
strong, but when he is with us in person, he is weak, and his words are
nothing!'
  These terms of abuse used of Paul were also used in the ancient world
of other speakers and it is quite clear that they referred to a cultural
attitude the Greeks had towards people who did not speak with a correct
form. One of the fundamental principles upon which the Greek status system
rested, as Professor Edwin A. Judge has pointed out, 'is the belief that
fine form is congruent with truth. Cultivation in the literary and artistic
sense was thus a means of legitimising the status of those who could afford
it and precisely because it made a conspicuous difference to a person's
public appearance, it became the means by which the social inferiority of
the uncultivated was imposed on them as a felt distinction.' Paul quite
consciously refused to accept this cultural distinction of the Greeks and
identified with Jesus Christ in his weakness and rejection.

</sample>



<sample><id> D04 </id>

<note> 2008 words </note>

<source> The cultured pearl. Australian readings in cross-cultural theology and mission. </source>

<h> Towards a Scriptural Critique of Racism </h>

<h> Two Bible Studies  </h>

<bl> By John Brown </bl>

I am convinced that our commitment to combat racism stems out of the central
tenets of our faith and that we have no need to seek for an esoteric or
peripheral biblical basis on which to build a commitment against racism.
  Racial discrimination is not about racist attitudes only, but is also
about the oppression - the crushing - of one racial group by another more
powerful racial group. It is about one racial group using its power to maintain
cultural, economic, political or social power over another, and to denigrate
or destroy that group. I cannot therefore use only the image-of-God theology
or the doctrine of creation to talk about the equality of races, and urge
love for one another as a theological imperative against racism. If the
oppressed claim that for themselves, it is a powerful tool in their hands
for their own liberating struggle. If the dominant class claim it, it simply
has tended in the past to reinforce the status quo.
  So I believe that we must start our study with the understanding of
oppression and dependence, exploitation and 'being put down', as the
relationship that pertains in a situation of racial discrimination.
  The experience of the Aboriginal people of Redfern, or of Palm Island,
is like the poor man in 2 Samuel 12:1-6.
	
 <misc> Biblical quote </misc>

Tribal Aboriginal people can look at the small pieces of land which they
have left on the map of Australia, and when mining companies or pastoralists
or governments claim that land, they see themselves as being in the situation
of the man with the one ewe lamb which the rich man took from him.
  The cry of the Aboriginal people is like that of the psalmist in Psalm
10:

  <misc>Extended biblical quote </misc>

The psalmist both cries out against the arrogant, powerful oppressor who
has no fear of justice or of God and, at the same time, affirms his faith
that God in the end will destroy the mocker, the powerful oppressor, and
that justice will be established.
  Release and justice for the oppressed are a prime concern of God according
to the Old Testament witness. The history of Israel and their meeting with
God begins when they are an oppressed racial minority. Their whole
understanding*undertanding of God is based on the fact that when they were
a powerless, oppressed racial minority in the most powerful empire of the
world of the time, God rescued them.
  In Exodus 3:7-12 we read:

  <misc>Biblical quote </misc>

God is the God who has seen, has heard, who knows, who has come down to
deliver. So from the beginning, racism is obnoxious to the faith of Israel,
and therefore all the law codes of Israel enjoin special loving care for
the strangers who live in Israel. We no longer know who these strangers
were, whether they were remnants of the original inhabitants who were there
when Israel moved into the country, or whether perhaps they were refugees
who had come and sought refuge in Israel from surrounding wars. But in any
case they are non-Israelites, of a different race who happened to be living
in Israel. All the law codes enjoin special care for them.
  Thus Exodus 22:21:

 <misc> Biblical quote </misc>

And in the Holiness code Leviticus 19:33:

 <misc> Biblical quote </misc>

And finally in the Deuteronomic code 24:17-18:
             
 <misc> Biblical quote  </misc>
	
And again in Chapter 27 verse 19: "Cursed be he who perverts the justice
due to the sojourner."
  This same theme is taken up also in the Prophets. Justice is to be done
to the poor and the oppressed, injustice to be overthrown and compassion
to be shown to the sufferers. Isaiah 58:6-7:

 <misc> Biblical quote </misc>

Anti-racism and love for a minority racial group is not something peripheral
to the faith. It is central to the faith. It arises out of the very
self-understanding of the faithful.
  In the New Testament also the Kingdom of God announced by Jesus Christ
is seen to be good news to the poor and oppressed. This is not peripheral
but central to the Gospel.
  Thus in the story of the birth of Jesus in Luke 2 the angel says to the
shepherd:

 <misc> Biblical quote </misc>

The sign of the good news is that the saviour, the Christ, the Lord, is
lying in a chaff box because there is no room for him in the inn. He is
out on the river-bank because there is no room for him in the town. This
is the sign that the good news of the birth of the saviour is indeed good
news to the ostracised, to the people for whom there is no room.
  In Luke 4 we have the story of the temptations. These are a summary of
Jesus sorting out his options as a messiah. What kind of messiah was he to
be? How was he to fulfill his mission? In the temptations which came to
Jesus again and again thrughout his ministry, Jesus rejected the temptation
to be a bread messiah, to feed the hungry, to bring in material plenty;
the option to be a military ruler, either by compromise with the Romans
or by joining forces with the guerillas; and the option to become a miracle
worker who wins the allegiance of the credulous by performing miracles.
He rejects the temptation to do something for the oppressed as an authority
figure. Instead he goes down and lives among and with the poor and oppressed,
sharing their oppression, and from that position alongside and in fellowship
with the oppressed, he acts as their messiah.
  He comes back from the wilderness to the Nazareth synagogue and announces
that he has come to bring good news to the poor, and release to the oppressed.
He goes on to explain that this good news is particularly good news for
the people of other races, the outcasts.
  I had not realised until I saw a masked play in Korea last year how much
the outcasts of Israel centred in the ministry of Jesus. There I saw a masked
dance which was written from the viewpoint of the prostitutes, the lepers,
the foreigners, the tax collectors of Israel.
  Jesus told his disciples, when they gave a party to invite the outcasts
to their parties. He told them to lend, not expecting to receive again.
There is the conversation with the Samaritan woman which takes up a twentieth
of John's Gospel. It is a remarkable story about prejudice and God's acceptance
of people of all races, of a faith that overcomes racism and sexism. There
is the story of the Roman Centurion whose faith Jesus praised as being greater
than the faith of the people of Israel. There is the story of the ten lepers
who were healed, and the Gospel writer makes a point of saying that the one
man who returned to say thank you to Jesus was a Samaritan. There is the
story of the man who was a true neighbour to the man who fell among thieves,
and he puts this self-righteous view to shame by making the hero of this
story not a Jew but one of the despised Samaritans. So it is the people
of the oppressed, despised race who bring help to the rich, powerful and
arrogant Jews.
  In the new community Jesus tells his disciples that they are to love not
only their friends, because even the publicans do that, but also their
enemies.
  Jesus in his death became one of the oppressed. He suffered all that the
oppressed outcasts ever suffer and more. He suffered in order that both the
oppressors and oppressed might see their sins, repent and believe. In this
regard we might consider two passages in the Gospel according to John. First
of all, in John 12:31-32 Jesus, talking about his death on the night before he
is crucified, says: "Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the ruler of
this world be cast out". Every+body else saw the trial of Jesus as the
judgment of Jesus. John interprets it as the judgment of the world. The world
is judged because the world put the only truly righteous person to death. So
all those who suffer righteously have their sufferings taken up in that
self-giving of Jesus when he voluntarily goes to the cross.
  Then in John 13:31, there is the incredible saying of Jesus immediately
after one of his chosen disciples has gone out to sell him up: "Now is the Son
of Man glorified, and in him God is glorified". When is God glorified? God is
glorified at this point when the son of God is put on the cross and killed as
a common criminal. How can that be? When Jesus dies, the love of God is shown
in the most powerful way it could ever be shown. God bears the jibes, the
viciousness, the sinfulness of the world and, as he bears it, he forgives the
sins. This is an incredible love and in that act God is glorified. Jesus gives
himself to the oppressors in order that the oppressors, having killed the
righteous one, might see their sinfulness, their oppression, repent and be
saved.
  Indeed in the Acts of the Apostles in those first chapters, Peter preached
just that to the crowd. He told them that they had killed the righteous one,
the Son of God, and they ought therefore to repent of their sins that God
might forgive them. And we are told how hundreds, no thousands, of people did
repent when they saw the significance of what they had done. 
  Jesus not only gave himself as a sacrifice for the world, but showed us a way
whereby the Church must give itself in order that oppression might be defeated
among us. He said to his disciples on many occasions: "Come take up your Cross
and follow me if you would be my disciples". To take up one's Cross is not to
bear a load of personal pain. It is to bear the blows of the oppressors on
behalf of the oppressed. It is to stand beside the oppressed bearing the blows
that are aimed at them; receiving the wounds that are aimed at them, in order
that the oppressor might see his or her oppression, be convicted and converted
and changed.
  I believe that this tells us much about how Churches might act in regard to
combating the oppression of minority racial groups. We are called to stand
beside and in solidarity with the racially oppressed, and bear some of the
blows that are aimed at them, and that bearing of blows is itself redemptive
and converting.
  Through the sacrifice of Christ we are saved. Out of gratitude we offer
ourselves to bear the Cross, receive the blows, suffer in order that the
oppressed may be set free, and we witness to Jesus Christ.
  We are called into a new kind of community where the question asked is not:
Who is my neighbour? but, What must I do in order to be a neighbour to the
oppressed?
  We are witnesses to a Kingdom which is coming, a Kingdom of love,
righteousness and justice, and in the next study we look a little more at that
vision.

	<h> II </h>
In Genesis 1:26 God, we are told, created Adam. He saw what he had made and
was pleased. I do not know what colour Adam was or what physical features he
had. We are told that he was made in the image of God which I take to refer to
his intellect, his person, his soul.
  In Genesis 10 we are told that through the blessing of God, Noah became the
common ancester of all the nations and races. 
  To tolerate racial discrimination is therefore at once to deny the
perfection of God's creation. It is to say that God made a lot of mistakes,
making some peoples superior, some inferior. At the same time it is to deny
that Adam is made in the image of God.

</sample>
                  

<sample><id> D05 </id>

<note> 2005 </note>

<source> Beyond belief: Theosophy in Australia 1779-1939. </source>

<h> To Theosophise Australia </h>

<bl> By Jill Roe </bl>

Over seventy Australian theosophists attended the Jubilee celebrations at
Adyar in December 1925 when, it was claimed, the Lord spoke through the
chosen vehicle, Krishnamurti, for the first time. Leadbeater's party returned
in early 1926 hugging the idea that the Coming had begun. They brought with
them the young Peter Finch, abandoned at Adyar by a gallivanting Buddhist
grandmother; and, more auspicious, Annie Besant's loyal lieutenant since
1902, George Arundale, with his beautiful young wife Rukmini.
  Although Arundale had never been to Australia before, he was almost
immediately elected general secretary of the Australian section, on
Leadbeater's recommendation, which post he held from 1926 to 1928. The
delighted and now orderly section presumed, correctly, that exciting days
lay ahead. They had been delivered in Arundale, a Cambridge-educated
Englishman, with glittering theosophical credentials dating back to childhood
acquaintance with HPB herself, twenty years' service in India, including
foundation of the Order of the Star in the East. In 1925 during an exciting
week of clairvoyance in Holland, Arundale had entered, and subsequently
rose to be regionary Indian bishop of, the Liberal Catholic Church. It would
be perfectly proper for his new hosts to address the impressive newcomer
as `Bishop Arundale' or Dr Arundale - honoris causa from the would-be
theosophical world university planned for Madras in 1925 - though he often
appeared as the Rt Rev. Arundale, and liked `Bishop George'.
  Mrs Ransom, in command since 1924, departed gracefully for a new tour
of duty in South Africa with the assurance of an administration ready for
the transformation of Australia into a great theosophic*theosopic community,
which, it speedily emerged, was Arundale's plan of action. Convention responded
keenly to his slogan `theosophise Australia'.
  Initially, `to theosophise Australia' meant doubling member+ship, increasing
cash flow, putting theosophy `across Australia', and uplifting the nation.
The time had passed for technical discussion of karma and reincarnation.
Arundale announced in exemplary fashion that he had already joined nine
brotherhood movements in Sydney, the League of Nations Union, the Prohibition
Society, the Food Reform League, the Humanitarian Society, the RSPCA, the 
British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection (NSW branch), the Good 
Film League, the Peace Society and the WEA; and agog with such dynamism, 
Convention in April 1926 rushed to maximise good fortune. It heard about 
a new Advance! Australia publishing company and endorsed a plan to transform 
Theosophy in Australia into a monthly magazine. A.E. Bennett, partner in the 
new publishing company, also reported a bold technological initiative: the 
newly developed medium of wireless would be deployed in a proposed theosophical 
broadcasting station at Adyar House, to be linked with the Manor, the Star 
Amphitheatre and St Alban's Liberal Catholic Church, to spread theosophy 
and a first-class program of music and lectures over Australia. The pioneering 
possibilities of a spiritual community in Sydney, mentioned by Leadbeater, 
regained an optimistic glow, now that a maker of theosophical men had arrived. 
The record states primly that all Arundale's plans were endorsed, though what 
happened to the idea of a theosophical museum is not known; and members 
restricted their `terrific enthusiasm' to Australian projects, shelving the 
idea of making the society a base for a world religion, as mooted at the 
Jubilee. 
  In a matter of months, theosophising Australia began in earnest. Advance!
Australia, a political monthly, did not replace Theosophy in Australia,
which continued under the symptomatic name change, The Australian Theosophist,
but the monthly duly appeared, with official backing from the section, in
July 1926, forty-eight pages, sixpence, co-edited by Arundale and South
Australian journalist James Leonard Davidge. A month later, on 23 August
1926, the Theosophical Broadcasting Station Pty Ltd, headed by Arundale,
officially launched Radio 2GB as a `B' class station, that is, financed
by advertising. Atypically for `B' class stations, it was to be resolutely
highbrow. (2GB, in other hands since 1936, is a major commercial broadcaster
in Sydney, to the present day retaining a reputation for thoughtfulness.)
Two new press agencies, Fidelity New Service and the Country Press Agency,
dispensed favourable theosophical information.
  The new general secretary galvanized Bligh Street, now more vital and
bustling than the old Hunter Street building had ever been, with many new
departments of work. Publicity was especially busy, despatching 4000 magazines
per month to influential people nominated by members. Adyar Hall, advertised
as the most beautiful hall in Sydney, attracted substantial bookings, and
provided cultural space for members with artistic abilities: for art displays,
lunch-hour concerts arranged by the Music Lovers' Concert Committee and
given by the Theosophical String Quartet formed to service 2GB, and topical
midday lectures. It was decreed that Wednesday evening lodge meetings
henceforth would revolve around a program of music (the section now had
a musical director, Edward Branscombe, who formed the Adyar Ladies' Choir);
socials; debates, preferably on the lives of great men; and Star meetings.
  The irrepressible Arundale and Australian theosophy awaiting the World
Teacher made the preparation of other sections look simple-minded and staid.
Suppressing doubts about the expensive amphitheatre, undaunted by the closure
of the model school, Australian theosophists rallied, this time to the call
of culture. Never before, and never again, would the Theosophical Society
in Australia assume such a high profile as in the late twenties, the Arundale
phase.
  At first Arundale could not be sure what to make of Australians. But,
as a pupil of Dr Besant, `the greatest statesman the world has at present',
he began by talking: on radio stations, from pulpits, and through the house
journals. Like previous theosophical visitors, he saw a rare type inhabiting
this hospitable land, combining the key theosophical virtue of brotherliness
with a promising pioneering spirit. A young country appealed to Arundale
the theosophic educator. And there were good vibrations. `I feel in the
air of Australia,' he wrote, `a certain intangible something which presages
a wonderful future not yet, except by the idealistic visionary few, contacted
by the people as a whole ... Nowhere in the world, I imagine, should the Great
Teacher win a warmer welcome.'
  Since theosophists never doubted that they were the visionary few, word
that they should now give a lead to Australia was welcome. It was not just
a matter of permeating national life with brotherliness, as first thought,
but of setting true national standards. Arundale's `The Australia Section:
A Vision' had them living in peace, harmony and hygiene in suburban communities
with beautiful libraries and the wireless, preparing to serve their fellows,
inspired by `Christ's immediate presence'. Strenuous work lay ahead of the
lodges, instructed to build up a noble Australian citizenship: `every lodge
and every centre a community'. Theosophical keys must be applied to every
area of life, political, religious, social, educational and industrial. 
Australia, perceived as a melting pot, at a time of political experiment, 
was `open to the influence of great ideals and far-reaching schemes for human
betterment'. 
  The rhetoric improved with use. `It is the task of members of the Order
of the Star in the East and of the Theosophical Society,' continued Arundale,
`to see to it that Australia perseveringly treads the appointed pathway,
for members of these movements are the truest pioneers even in this land
of pioneers.' A Fellowship of Pioneers to celebrate the lives of world
benefactors formed immediately, with Arundale addressing its Anzac Day ceremony
in 1926 (the program included the recessional, chamber music, a reading
from poet John Masefield and the national anthem). Thereafter, Thursday
lunch-hour at Adyar House featured readings from great lives. Advance! 
Australia pamphlets, 3d each, included `A Pebble of Goodwill' and `Theosophy
and an ideal Australia'. While Arundale familiarized himself with Australian
life, and offered more exact strategy, members reminded themselves how small
Australia was compared with India, and basked in `colossal ambition'.
  There were indeed powerful new grounds for hope. With a magazine and a
radio station, the old obstacles of incomp+rehension and misrepresentation
could be removed. (That hostility derived from the public perception of
theosophy as non-Christian and even anti-Christian, never seemed to be taken
quite seriously.) Also theosophical standards in personal, social and political
life, if explained clearly, would win respect and influence. By 1927 both
Advance!  Australia and 2GB were running well, with the magazine at a print
run of 5000 monthly, and theosophists responded to calls for support for
the station. For the first time, the theosophical claim to public attention
extended beyond the lectern. To put it colloquially, theosophists had come
out.
  What then did a fringe group like that have to offer? As we have seen,
they had considerable resources, wide rather than deep, avowedly alternative
to the mainstream. How far theosophical values in personal, social and
political life represented the promised alternative in the twenties is the
most interesting question of all those raised by the history of theosophy
in Australia.
  The answer is complicated by the fact that theosophy was an esoteric culture.
Even at its most open, in the late 1920's, with sources which make assessment
possible virtually for the first time, the fact remains that by definition
they are still usually incomplete, and at crucial points, unsatisfactory.
Esoteric culture always exists in some sort of relationship to the general,
or exoteric, culture, sharing a common tradition even while interpreting
its basic realities quite differently, so that tense and unstable
juxtapositions are the norm. A neat example of the silences, and the
relationships, which also illustrates how far theosophical values posited
alternative values, emerges in the story of the piece de resistance radio
2GB.
  As noted earlier, the broadcasting idea went to Convention in Easter 1926.
However, Karel van Gelder of Blavatsky lodge was experimenting with
transmission from the Manor as early as 1923; and in 1925 a group of
theosophists had formed a theosophical broadcasting company in Sydney. Like
some spiritualists, notably E.J. Fisk managing director of Amal+gamated
Wireless 1916-1944, theosophists readily appreciated the possibilities of
the new medium. Not surprisingly they were quick off the mark in establishing
a station - though not quick enough to claim their first choice of call sign,
2AB, AB for Annie Besant, this call-sign having already been claimed by
Mr A.V. Badger of Neutral Bay. As is now fairly well known, the theosophical
broadcasters therefore had recourse to 2GB, Giordano Bruno, thought to be
a previous incarnation of Annie Besant and an old freethought hero, a
sixteenth-century martyr to `true science'.
  Credit for 2GB probably belongs to Alfred Edward Bennett (1889-1963),
a theosophist since about 1920, who managed the station 1926-1936. One of
the large family of Melbourne schoolmaster George Jesse Bennett, and younger
brother of Lieut.-General Henry Gordon Bennett, A.E. Bennett was an 
accountant who set up in Sydney in 1922, having previously managed
meatworks in Victoria and Western Australia. Arundale, with whom Bennett
was to have a dynamic partnership, gave him the credit, but also implied
that the station was his own initiative, prompted by the discovery that
the infant medium was not a monopoly in Australia as in Britain, and by
personal success lecturing on citizenship over Trades Hall stations in Brisbane
and Sydney:
    I dreamed a regular program of good things, things which would provide
    refined enjoyment, develop public taste and appreciation. Good music,
    not the rubbish we mostly hear, interesting addresses on art, on science,
    on literature, on the great social problems, on the various movements
    working for Australian betterment, on Australian ideals - political,
    religious, social, educational, on international questions, short addresses
    on Theosophy and its application to the problems of life, topical views
    ... such could form the ordinary program.
Publicity for theosophy, scope for theosophical lectures, and a demand for
theosophical literature would all flow from this limitless opportunity.
  Whatever the inspiration, theosophical money and skills were readily to 
hand, and it was astute to be early on the broadcasting scene. The proposal
caused anxiety, not only to the residents of Mosman, fearful of interference
with existing reception from the new masts at the Manor, but also because
the idea of religious broadcasting in a sectarian community frightened liberal
opinion. 
                                                              
</sample>


<sample><id> D06 </id>

 <source> A matter of life and death. The future of Australia's churches. </source>

<note> 2009 words </note>

<bl> By John Bodycomb </bl>

<h> Chapter 1 </h>

<h> ONE FOR THE DELPHIC ORACLE! WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF AUSTRALIA'S CHURCHES? </h>

  In 1950 I was among the 77 per cent of Australians who went to church
at best irregularly; my church links were through a youth group, and reflected
more the desires of the flesh than a hunger for the holy. But things changed;
my conversion surprised everyone, including the minister. He was further
surprised the following year, when I told him I believed I was called to
ordained ministry.

<h>1. RECALLING J.D. NORTHEY </h>
Hence it was in 1951 that I first met J.D. Northey, to present my credentials
as a candidate in the Congregational tradition. Selection procedures were
less rigorous then than they are today, which was probably to my advantage.
Having been told he was a dignified and scholarly man (both of which were
true), I was suitably apprehensive.
  I was quite unprepared for what lay in wait. J.D. greeted me in blue overalls
and armed with a mattock, with which he was attacking the college garden.
At 62, he had not long quit the tennis court, which had seemed more suitable
than the boxing, cricket and football of his earlier days. He had lost the
sight of one eye in the last-mentioned: a slight disability of which one
became aware if walking on his wrong side. He could wheel quickly, and a
bump from his stocky fourteen stone was a hazard for the unwary.
  From 1952-56 I lived under the same roof with J.D. and Mrs. Northey, in
a small group of bachelors - since we were not permitted to marry until
our courses were over. I can therefore claim to know him better than many
- as a man, as a Christian, and as a minister of the Word. Hence there is
more than the normal degree of privilege attached to being a J.D. Northey
lecturer.
  It is enough here to mention three things I owe him. (That, in itself,
could bring a smile to those who knew J.D., because for him everything came
in threes; he was trinitarian to the end!) First was the need for a high
pain tolerance in the work of ministry; to curl up and fall in a heap with
every bump ill-befits the minister. J.D.'s high pain tolerance came in part
from the loss of his father at twelve; he went to work then to support a
widowed mother, three young brothers and a step-sister.
  Second, I learned from him how critical in an unstructured occupaion are
good self-motivating and self-monitoring devices, lest one become a bum+bler
(for which there is ample scope in the ministry!). J.D. was almost
frighteningly well-organised - even to his fifteen-minute siesta each day.
  And third, I learned from him to speak of the divine with a healthy awareness
of one's flawed perception in such things. The only occasion I can recall
getting into real trouble was when I wanted to do something of which J.D.
disapproved strongly. I made the mistake of protesting that I had divine
guidance. He exploded with terrifying force. `How dare you', he said, `invoke
the divine name to justify what you want to do!' That message has stayed
with me; it causes me to hesitate before offering too glib a theological
explanation of this or that in terms of what God might, or might not, be
doing.

<h>2. THE FLOWERING FIFTIES </h>

When I told my paternal grandfather, in 1951, that I was relinquishing my
career as an accountant to enter theological school, he was dumbfounded.
`John, you are mad!' he said. `The church is dying! People aren't into religion
any more, and you will be out of a job.' Grandfather was not an unbeliever.
In his ninetieth year he would still descend at the bedside each night on
his creaky old knees and discuss things with the Eternal. However, although
Grandfather was in no doubt about God's survival, he was concerned about
the future of organised religion and its ordained ones - whom I intended
to join.
  As a hearty young convert, I was not in the least worried, and my confidence
was duly vindicated. In the fifties there were clear indications of an upswing
in the fortunes of Australia's churches. A new and successful approach to
fund raising came via Colonel Wells, and the phenomenon of mass revivalism
via Billy Graham. New churches were popping up like mushrooms, sunday schools
were at capacity in the suburban developments, and weekly church attendance
peaked in 1960, at 30 per cent of the popula+tion. That represented a leap
of almost one-third on the base figure of 23 per cent a decade earlier.
  Not surprisingly, we concluded that we were doing most things well. There
was no real attempt at isolating out those factors in the church or in the
culture which might have been working in our favour. That kind of exercise
has assumed more importance recently, of course, and we are becoming aware
that explaining the vicissitudes of organised religion is rather complicated.
It is possible to see with the benefit of hindsight that one of the most
potent factors then was demographic; we gained from the post-war baby boom,
which put many more children and youth in touch with the church, and raised
the interest of their parents.
  My first settlement fell in this period, and by generally accepted canons
was very successful. Although it was a city church, there was a large sunday
school and youth group. The evening congregation increased 50 per cent in
spite of TV's arrival on the scene, and the morning congregation doubled.
It was heady stuff, and at the ripe old age of 27 I told a mass gathering
in the Melbourne Town Hall that God was sending a new wave. As always, it
was hard work, but the rewards were there.
  I am not convinced that doing the same things in the same way today would
assure the same results. Indeed, I am fairly sure it would not; many
ingredients in the situation today make it quite unlike that of thirty years
ago.
  (Unfortunately, one of the disadvantages to having a top-heavy age
distribution in our ordained ministry is that older clergy can have a tendency
to look backwards for their operational models. After all, that is where
it happened, and when one is three-quarters down the track, it can be hard
not to think, `If it worked then, why shouldn't it work now?')
  Thirty-five years after my grandfather's gloomy prognosis, there are still
churches. Indeed, as I have often argued, it may be quite inappropriate
to say with Bruce Wilson that Australians are `taking flight from religion'.
Unless we equate being religious with churchgoing, there is a wealth of
evidence from what I call the `far side of the moon' to the contrary.
  In fact, the same proportion claims to attend weekly worship now as made
that claim in 1950: 23 per cent. When we consider the decline in Catholic
attendance over this period (from almost 70 per cent to less than 40 per
cent), it is apparent that something has picked up the slack. Furthermore,
since the 23 per cent who claim to be in church every week cannot be the
same as those who made that claim in 1950, it is obvious that many more
must have `gotten religion' to replace the dead and the drop-outs. Finally,
since the population has doubled between 1950 and 1986, 23 per cent today
is twice as many in raw numbers.

<h>3. THE EMPTY PEWS AND SLACKENING TIES </h>

  To some extent, of course, this is statistical game-playing. One is
re+minded of that comment by the Scottish writer, Andrew Lang: `He uses
statistics as a drunken man uses lampposts - for support rather than for
illumination!' Lest we delude ourselves by the foregoing, two observations
are appropriate. First is that right across Western society, growing numbers
still classify themselves as `Christian' and give assent to traditional
items of belief, but have been showing less inclination toward regular
churchgoing. Second, those churches most seriously affected are what we
call the `liberal mainstream', which includes the tradition to which we
belong.
  This is not to say church attendance is everywhere declining. Contrary
movements can be cited; e.g. Poland, Korea and Latin America. In the first
two, piety and packed churches cannot be separated from national patriotism
and the desire to combat a threatening alternative (communism). In Latin
America, a groundswell of resistance to social injustices has much to do
with a variety of ways church allegiance is maintained. 
  But in each case where church life appears to be vigorous in one style
or another, we are dealing with widely-different streams; any attempt to
find a simple, single-cause explanation which accounts for all is naive.
Yet, some common features can be found: in each of the foregoing, the corpus
of Christian tradition has been locked into the deepest aspirations of the
masses. Therefore, in one sense each may be regarded as a radically
`con+textual' expression of organised religion - needed there and now by
reason of the social and cultural context, but not necessarily appropriate
in other places or other times.
  The trends in this country are of a different order, and are broadly
consistent with what can be seen in other Western societies. That is to
say, the liberal mainstream churches are losing ground numerically, and
this process looks like continuing. It is particularly apparent in the Uniting
Church. For example, the 1984 Victorian Synod survey showed that, from 1978
to 1984, confirmed membership fell by nearly 10 per cent. If that trend
were to continue (and we have no contrary evidence at this stage), member+ship
by the end of the century could be under 55,000, from over 83,000 in 1978.
Second, on any given Sunday just under half our members are in their pews;
put another way, every week half the members are missing.

<h> 4. THE SCOPE AND STYLE OF THESE LECTURES </h>

  And so, the issue to which these lectures are addressed is that of church
growth and decline - not in Poland, Latin America or Korea, but in Australia.
In fact, they are even more tightly focused - concentrating principally
on the Uniting Church in Australia. Developments outside Australia are not
ignored; indeed, some note is taken of what is happening elsewhere. However,
the reasons why churches register gains or losses in one place may be quite 
different from the reasons for gains and losses elsewhere. 
  Because it is important to know both what to expect and what not to expect,
it should be understood that there is no attempt here to present a theological
rationale. The lectures are primarily an exercise in thinking sociologically,
for reasons which will be explained shortly. Neither do they set out to
deal with the global mission of Christ's people - as apostles for a just
and humane planetary culture. In short, this is not a set of theological
lectures, and neither is it a manifesto for Christian mission. One is entitled
to ask, `Why choose the subject of church growth and decline?' There would
seem to be at least three reasons for doing so.
  One is that for many church people it is a very live issue. It even keeps
many of them awake at night. Perhaps it should not, but it does! Experience
shows that continually skirting the issues which concern people, and instead
pressing what we believe `should' concern them, works only with some of
the people some of the time. If church growth and decline is a serious concern
for a significant number, it should be addressed.
  A second reason is that the subject seems to elicit a great deal of
ill-advised nonsense. Ups and downs in active support for organised religion
are not amenable to simple, single-cause explanations, but are extremely
complex. Some of the urgings of beatific and bright-eyed enthusiasts can
be damaging if they oversimplify these phenomena.  Chapters 2 and 3 identify a range of factors both external and internal, and examine their significance.

</sample>
                                     

<sample><id> D07 </id>

<source> The religious factor in Australian life. </source>

<note> 2018 words </note>


                              <h> INTRODUCTION </h>

		<list> A.  How to use this book

		B.  Who will want to use this book?

		C.  Major findings of this study

		D.  Some implications of the findings

		E.  Background

		F.  List of tables </list>

<h> A.  HOW TO USE THIS BOOK </h>

	Have you ever wondered how many Australians pray and how often?
Have you wondered if church attendance makes any difference in the
attitudes Australians hold about various matters? What percentage of
Australians do you think consider themselves religious people? Does this
make any difference in other parts of their lives? Are "religious" people
different from "non-religious" people? Do Catholics have different attitudes
from Anglicans, or are the religious groups pretty much the same?

	How often have you had a discussion around questions like these
and wanted "the facts"? There is a lot of opinion about the role of religion
in Australian life. Bruce Wilson (1983) and David Millikan (1981) argue
that Australia is a secular society with a dwindling minority of religious
people. Is this correct? For a quick answer look at the major findings
(starting on the next page).

	This book makes data relevant to such questions as these available.
It is a source book of research findings about the role of religion in
Australian life. The purpose is to make the results of the Australian Values
Systems Study handy for use. With these data in hand, the reader can ask
and answer his or her own questions. For example, "Does church attendance
make a difference in family life?" Yes (see Chapter VII for details on how).

	This book will not stop the debate about the role of religion in
Australian society. It should lift the debate by increasing the information
on the subject. As a result there is a great deal of data presented, too
much to digest in one sitting. That is not the point. Start by looking up
a topic that interests you.

	This book does not draw out all of the implications of the findings.
Rather it is the beginning of a process which will involve many people who,
in examining these data from their own vantage points will raise different
questions and draw different conclusions. You are invited to be part of
the process of interpretation and application of these data.

<h> B.  WHO WILL WANT TO USE THIS BOOK? </h>

	Who will want to use this book? Policy makers, both religious and
secular may find these data useful in forming a correct picture of the role
of religion and the future of the church. Church leaders, including both
clergy and laity may find information related to their ministry, evangelism
or church policy questions. Students of religion and society may want to
use these data in their analyses. Anyone interested in the role religion
plays in the way Australians think will find this book interesting and thought
provoking.

<h> C.  MAJOR FINDINGS </h>

	There is a large amount of detail in this book. The following list
of major findings is a sensitizing guide to the data. Following each "finding"
will be an indication of the location of the evidence supporting the "finding".
This list also acts as a highlighted summary of the study.
                           
<h> a.  Australia is More Religious Than Many Think </h>

	It cannot be said that Australia is essentially secular and irreligious
when:

1.	57.9% of Australians claim to be religious persons and only 4.5%
	claim to be atheists (Table I.V.3.a).

2.	57.4% of Australians rate the importance of God in their lives as
	6 or more on a scale of 1-10. Only 13.7% rated God as 1 (not at
	all important).

3.	85.6% of Australians identify with some religious group.

4.	Two-thirds of Australians pray, meditate or contemplate occasionally
	or more frequently (Table I.B.2.a).

5.	27.1% of Australians claim to go to church once per month or more
	frequently. 20.6% claim to go weekly (Table I.B.1.b).

6.	Nearly half of those who claim to have no religion, pray, meditate
	or contemplate occasionally or more frequently (Table I.B.2.b).

<h> b.  Denominational Identification Makes a Difference in Australian Society </h>

	The five groups of religious identification - Catholic, Anglican,
PMU (Presbyterian, Methodist and Uniting), RWP (theologically Right Wing
Protestant groups) and "Nones" (those who identify with no religious group)
- are found to differ from each other both in terms of religiosity and
non-religious attitudes. Denominational identification makes a difference
in Australian society.

1.	The RWP group is the most religious followed in order by the Catholics,
	the PMU group, Anglicans and the "Nones" (Chapter 1).

2.	Those who claim to have no religion are the most likely to object to a
	list of groups of people as neighbours. They are the least tolerant.
	The RWP group (conservative protestant) are the least likely to
	object. They are the most tolerant of these groups (Table V.A.1.a).
	It cannot be said that those who are religious are less tolerant
	of sub-groups in Australian society. In fact the opposite is the
	case.

3.	Conservative religious groups are not necessarily conservative
	politically (Table IV.C.1.b).

4.	Anglicans are the most willing to sacrifice for Australia and most
	committed to the monarchy. The PMU group are the proudest to be
	Australian (Table VI.B.1.b).

5.	In eight out of ten social issues measured denominational
	identification makes an appreciable difference (Chapter VI).

6.	Denominational identification is related to pronounced differences
	in attitudes toward family. Catholics and the RWP group were the
	most pro-family, least likely to approve of abortion or divorce.
	The "Nones" were the least supportive of family and least likely
	to object to divorce or abortion (Chapter VII).
 
7.	The "Nones" tend to be more hedonistic than those identifying with
	some religious group. But there are differences among the religious
	groups as well. The RWP group tends to be the most strict on moral
	issues (see Chapter VIII for specific differences).
                                            
<h> c.  Degree of Religiosity Makes a Difference in Australian Society </h>

1.	Those who think of God in "personal" terms pray much more frequently
	than do those who think of God as a "life force/spirit" (Table
	II.B.1.a).

2.	Those who are more religious have a slight tendency to favour more
	conservative political parties (Table III.A.2.a).

3.	Those who are more religious are more pro-Australian and pro-monarchy
	than are the less religious (Table IV.B.1.c). See Chapter IV for
	more detailed analyses.

4.	Those who are more religious are more open to the idea of having
	persons of a different race as neighbours (Table V.B.2.b). See Chapter
	V for more detailed analyses.

5.	Degree of religiosity makes an appreciable difference in 7 of the
	10 social issues analysed. The more religious are more likely to
	consider the pace of change too fast (VI.A.2.a), are more inclined
	toward international altruism (VI.B.2.a), are more likely to think
	too much is spent on the environment (VI.B.2.a), are more opposed
	to the use and legalization of drugs (VI.C.2.c) and less likely
	to report that they drank alcohol (VI.C.3.b). See Chapter VI for
	more detailed analyses.

6.	The data show an interesting relationship between religiosity and
	family. The more religious are more likely to be married (once)
	and least likely to have lived in a de facto relationship (VII.A.2.c),
	less likely to consider marriage to be outdated (VII.A.1.c), more
	likely to have children (VII.A.3.b), slightly more likely to think
	"a woman's place is in the home" (VII.B.1.c), less likely to approve
	of abortion (VII.C.1.c), less likely to approve of free sex, single
	mothers and in vitro fertilization procedures (VII.D.2.a and
	VII.D.2.b), and less likely to approve of divorce (VII.E.2.a). See
	Chapter VII for further detailed analyses.

7.	Finally, the data show an interesting relationship between religiosity
	and moral issues. The more religious are more likely to take a
	traditional, conservative, pro-family stance on moral issues. See
	Chapter VIII for detailed analyses.

	Australia is not a secular society with just a few religious people
on the fringes. Further, denomination and degree of religiosity do make
a difference in the attitudes and values of Australians. These facts contradict
commonly held ideas that religion is irrelevant and of little importance
to public policy and public life in Australia. The next section addresses
some of these implications.
                      
<h> D.  SOME IMPLICATIONS OF THESE FINDINGS </h>

	Four people were asked to write a brief reaction to the data in
this book. These reactions will sensitize readers to possible implications
of this study for several aspects of Christian ministry and witness in
Australia.

       	  <h> Implications for the Purpose and Strategy of Churches </h>

	The study suggests some fundamental issues about the purpose of
	churches and the strategies they adopt to achieve those purposes.

	1.   Some of the data are so contrary to conventional Australian
	     platitudes that further exploration of the issues is essential.
	     For example, those who for decades have complained of, or exulted
	     in, our "secular" society where "religious" understanding is
	     unimportant and/or declining apparently now have cause for
             reflection. That particular battle largely has been misplaced.

	     Ways of discussing and measuring "religiosity" that are grounded
	     within our society need to be developed rather than using terms
	     and measures that do not fully "connect", or may mean different
	     things to different people.

	2.   45% of people who understand themselves as "religious" do not
	     or only rarely attend church. 15% of people who do not see
	     themselves as "religious" attend church occasionally or regularly.

	     Looking backwards, have basic goals for some churches been
	     displaced to the extent that such churches have become only
	     incidentally "religious"? Possibly other objectives such as
	     the search for institutional strength and extension have become
	     primary in such cases.

	     Looking forwards, there may be scope for numerous entrepre+neurial
	     options in seeking to express more vigorously and clearly
	     Christian approaches that relate more closely to underlying
	     life concerns and experiences.
	
	3.   "Religious" people are found to be more tolerant of the
	     disadvantaged and less tolerant of the deviant than
	     "non-religious" people, although there are complexities in
	     the detailed data.

	     Churches that seek to follow a person described as a friend
	     of outcasts and sinners have an opportunity to exercise a far
	     stronger accepting, reconciling and healing role in our society.

	Jim Stebbins, Baptist pastor also working in Public Service.

		   <h> Implications for Educational Programmes  </h>

		This book presents several challenges to those in the church
	involved in Christian leadership training, preaching, religious
        instruction, theological education or any form of Christian marketing:
	
	1.  There is something seriously wrong with existing programmes
	    if 27% of the sample are regular church-goers yet 58% regard
	    themselves as religious (alienating language, rituals and
	    structures?).

	2.  The fact that 58% of the "Nones" (no religion) said they believed
	    in a personal God/spirit or life force, suggests that there
	    is a ready market for the Christian religion, if only its advocates
	    and leaders learned fundamental skills of communication.

	3.  If the gospel of the Kingdom has impact on social life, then
	    it is disturbing that "the most interest in politics was expressed
	    by the least religious and the atheists" (p. 37). If the
	    socio-political implications of the gospel are not addressed
	    in pulpits, seminaries, Sunday Schools, small groups and RI
	    classes, how are Christians to be equipped as agents of social
	    transformation? Forms of Christian education that produce
	    socio-political quietism need to be abandoned and replaced by
	    those that promote critical reflection and transforming action
	    in an unjust world. It is embarrassing that the greatest level
	    of dissatisfaction about the way Aborigines have been treated
	    occurs in the "Nones" group (36% cf. PMU - 17%) )p. 47f).

	4.  If security and family life are the "most highly ranked life
	    goals" for Australians (p. 152), one can only deduce that 73%
	    of Australians identify most of what goes on inside church as
	    marginal to their interests. Yet clearly these two themes are
	    central to the Christian religion. Perhaps the "market" could
	    be recaptured if evangelism and instruction were set much more
	    in the context of the home and local community, informal
	    relationships, dialogue, inquiry and intelligible language.

Neville Carr. Chairman. Christian Research Association.

                              <h> Implications for Pastoral Care </h>

	There is a host of pastorally-relevant information within this study. I would like here simply to point to two or three issues which I believe have major implicaitons for pastoral strategy.

</sample>      


<sample><id> D08 </id>

<source> On Being - April 1986 </source>

<note> 2003 words </note>

<h> Jesus the sinner's mate </h>

<bl> By John Hannaford </bl>

IS IT BLASPHEMOUS TO SEE GOD AS A friend? Does He dwell in unapproachable
light? There seems at all times to have been a dispute about the `otherness'
of God, and how approach+able He is.
  The Jewish testimony of faith was that God was `other' and awesome and
this is gathered up in the idea of holiness. As Isaiah reported: `Holy, Holy,
Holy, The Lord Almighty is Holy' (Isaiah 6:3, G.N.B.).
  Yet the Old Testament also has a strand of intimacy in the relations of
the deity and the devotees. Yahweh was the husband and lover to Israel and
Judah. David saw Yahweh as a caring shepherd to a `pet' lamb. (We need to
remember that Israel treated sheep differently from us. They had small flocks
and knew each sheep by name, only eating meat at major religious feasts.)
  Enoch spent time with God in fellowship, Moses saw God face to face and
Abraham was the friend of God.
  The easy familiarity with God that belonged to the golden age of innocent
man, in the Garden of Eden, was reapproached only occasionally. But there
is the promise of restoration hinted at, a return to the Garden Paradise
when God is again our friend.
  To have strolled with the Master Gardener - sometimes talking over the
day's business, crops and yields, or sometimes silent - and to have been
friends in the pleasant intimacy of a garden, is a clear picture of paradise
and the joy stored up for us in heaven.
  Jesus is the restorer of that lost relationship.
  Jesus claimed an intimacy with God, indeed, to be God. Yet He shocked
the `separated ones', the Pharisees, by mixing with ordinary people.
  Jesus was accessible to all men and cheerfully mixed with the underworld
and prostitutes. The outrage of the good religious people was expressed
in their scornful outburst, "Here is a...friend of tax collectors and
`sinners'" (Matthew 11:19).

MORE THAN ONE EVANGELIST HAS POR+trayed Jesus as the sinner's friend. Yet
recently one of Australia's best published theologians cautioned against
viewing Jesus as a friend. In fact, hardly anyone does speak of Jesus as
a friend, except in one well-known hymn. 
  It seems obvious to me from John's fifteenth chapter and throughout the
gospels that Jesus came and lived as a friend to all, even the poor, the
outlaws and the undesirables.
  But how genuine was that friendship? Did Jesus just `act' friendly? Is
He really our friend today?
  Jesus said in John 15:12,13, "My commandment is this: Love each other
as I have loved you. Greater love has no one than this, that one lay down
his life for his friends."
  What a relief - from His part He really did offer true friendship and
true caring. What is our part of friendship?
  You can't be mates unless you share - that is obvious from Australian culture,
and from reading more in the New Testament. In A Peculiar People, the
fascinating book about `New Australia', the utopian journey that went from
the 1890 shearers' strike to Paraguay, Gavin Souter tells of Labour leader
Lane's rediscovery of God and, incidentally, quotes a court hearing about
mateship. Mates were more than acquaintances - they shared. Mates took one
cheque and held a common purse (kitty).
  As a young post-war Australian, it was not until after I left primary
school that I got through Anzac week without hearing of the thrilling courage
of Private Simpson and the Red Cross donkey which served as a Gallipoli
ambulance until Simpson paid the supreme sacrifice and laid down his life
for his mates. The Victoria `Cross' expressed it as no other star or medal
could. There were other heroes too.
  Perhaps with a mythology like this, Aussies find it easier to relate to
Jesus than His church. (I mean `mythology' technically - as the ideal
recollection of an event which shapes our current values.) The source of
the severe standard for judging the church may be in this ideal.
  This `real' mateship finds a poor substitute in sitting in rows for an
hour on Sunday, with perhaps an extra Bible study or a lukewarm cup of tea
thrown in.
  We know it takes two to be friends. We can't do it alone and we are commanded
both to love one another and also told what love is.
  It is a common theme in the New Testament. An old enemy of Jesus commented,
"We were God's enemies but He made us His friends through the death of His
son" (Romans 5:10 GNB). And Jesus' best friend said, "This is how we know
what love is: Christ gave His life for us. We too, then, ought to give our
lives for our brothers" (1 John 3:16 GNB).
  I feel a bit funny calling John the evangelist of old Jesus' best friend,
because actually He's my best friend too.
  The rest of the passage from the fifteenth chapter of John's Gospel goes
on to say:
  "You are my friends if you do what I command you. I don't call you servants
any longer, because servants don't know what's on the master's mind. Instead
I call you friends, because I've told you everything I have heard from the
Father. You didn't choose me, I chose you and appointed you to go and bear
much fruit, the kind of fruit that endures."
  Quite clearly we are Jesus' friends if we care for each other and follow
His directions. It's good to know that Jesus chooses to be our friend, calls
us friends, and wants us to go on to make lasting friends. `Lasting friends'
for ourselves, and for Him, is surely what `fruit that endures' is all about.

PART OF WHAT HAS BOGGED DOWN THE church is that we simply are not in the
business, the family business, of making friends that last.
  Much of the dross which passes for discipleship is not the true gold but
merely information transfer. Many a man or woman would cheerfully take on
teaching a discipleship class - but what, in Australia, is closest to
discipleship?
  How many would befriend the entire class?
  When I was first ordained I was warned against making friends in the parish.
It seems to have been common, if wrong, advice.
  Yet discipleship is more than easygoing ac+quaintanceship. There is also
learning.
  I preached one sermon on discipleship with a driver's `L' plate around
my neck. Part of disciple+ship surely means `driver under instruction'.
But it is friendship as well, and it is definitely on-the-job learning,
not classroom teaching.
  By custom and necessity along the narrow tracks of Palestine, a band of
friends walked line-astern, and followed the leader. But across the wide
dusty Australian plains, He'd say `Walk with me', as well as `Follow me'.
  Yes, He is the only Son of God. He is the Truth and I'm only a man - but
He offered men then, and me now, His friendship.
  If you walked with Him and talked with Him then you were His mate and
you became a disciple.
  Jesus said, as you learn to do things His way - in fact make friends His
way, for Him - you are bearing much fruit and so becoming (or showing yourself)
to be disciples (John 15:8).
  It was His own actions, Jesus went on to say in the same chapter, that
made people hate Him. Those actions included befriending outlaws and `scum'
as much as healing and preaching.

IN RECENT TIMES THERE HAS been a healthy tread away from emphasis on conversion
to emphasis on disciple+ship.
  But perhaps it is an over-correction. The Bible speaks of the gift of
evangelism, although many churches seem to have misunderstood its meaning.
  I hardly know how to illustrate just how ludicrous it is to ask people
you don't know to become followers of Jesus, whom they don't know.
  It seems ridiculous to ask people in our culture, on the basis of a 20
minute story, to make a `decision'. You wouldn't try to get married on that
basis, but you might make a date. You wouldn't make a lifetime friend on
that basis either, though you might start being friendly. We ought to treat
being a Christian at least as seriously.
  To set the scene, let me tell a little story.
  Imagine a well-meaning headmaster who believes that the best friendships
start at school but who is shocked to realise that he has many new students
who do not know each other well enough to be friends.
  He asks the local minister to organise for them to become friends.
  The assembly begins with a short welcome and explanation. In the next
hour the minister and the headmaster would like them to become friends.
It would be nice to have time to use names and find out a few details but
to save time each is given a number, starting from one.
  Taking a number from the hat the minister explains that the person behind
the number needs a true friend. Someone to share their lunch, to take their
notes in class if the other is sick.
  Some detail is given: being a real friend would mean walking home together,
perhaps even moving to a closer home to allow more visiting. Certainly a
true friend would have to change subjects so that they could do projects
together. And it is to be a life-long commitment. 
  So the students are asked to signify who will be the life-long friend
of the first number from the hat.
  If no one puts a hand up at once, a few jokes are told about numbering
off and friendship generally to relax the class. A girl from last year's
`Friend for Life' school assembly is brought in to say it worked out well
for her. It is a moving testimony.
  Then the school choir sings a song about friendship and a rousing appeal
is given for a volunteer to be the friend of number X.
  A new number is drawn from the hat and the process is repeated.
  What a simple, quick process to make friends the headmaster and minister
have discovered. But is it any good?
  Aussies don't like to be pushed into friendship - but they are loyal to
an old friend.
  By no means am I denying the role of an evangelist or even less the need
for a crisis encounter with the Lord of the Earth. But I simply want to
say that this is a secular country with church-going numbers roughly comparable
to percen+tages in Japan and Pakistan.
  `Out there' they think Jesus is something to do with dropping a brick
on your bare foot, something to do with Father Christ+mas, and a reasonable
bloke who wouldn't ask a worker to get up early on Sundays.
  That anyone responds to such an appeal says a lot for `irresistible grace'
and little for cultural sensitivity. It is not the way to make friends in
our culture, is it?
  And, of course, Jesus is not presented as a friend anyway. `A cosmic
aspro' for life's little bothers seems the technique of our American brothers.
A mixture of legalism, ethical and religious propositions, the answer to
guilt, the antidote to sin or even mediaeval nostalgia is offered by others.
  Jesus is everything to me and sometimes some of the above. But above all,
He is my `true-blue' friend. You might be able to sell an aspro, but no-one
has sold me a friend. Instead, it happened by introduction.

  PEOPLE HAVE INTRODUCED ME to friends. My sister introduced me to Janine,
now my wife. Other friendships have started by sharing a common interest
or experience.
  I believe Christ the Ascended King gifted His church with gifts like mercy,
help and hospitality which bridge the gap in helping people become friends.
  The way I see it happen is that you may just be a terrific friend, the
best bloke in the street, and so you are asked what makes you different.
              
</sample>
                       

<sample><id> D09 </id>

<source> World Vision News </source>

<note> 2027 words </note>

<subsample><id>D09a</id>

<source> World Vision News - Hykt 1986 </source>

<h> Sister Emmanuelle </h>

<bl> By Peter Philp </bl>

At the age of 12 she prayed that one day she would become a nun. As a teenager,
she loved to go out with boys, go to dances and dress up in expensive clothes.
As a nun she became a professor of philosophy and then in her sixties, Sister
Emmanuelle's life-long dream came true. She went to live on a garbage dump.
  Rather than retiring in the relative comfort of a French convent, this
sprightly old nun moved into Zabbaleen garbage tip in Cairo with a community
of killers, thieves and outcasts, who drank excessively and smoked hashish.
  And this was done with a papal blessing.
  Nobody, including her spiritual directress, ever dreamed that young Madelene
(as she was known before joining the order) would last the distance in the
convent. How would a joie de vivre, who liked to disobey all authorities,
survive the disciplined life expected of all community members in an Our
Lady of Sion convent. Equally as strong as their doubts, was her confidence
in the vocation calling that had been with her since childhood and the words
of St. Paul: "I can do anything with Jesus Christ who strengthens me".
  Half a century later Sister Emmanuelle is still a member of the Sion Order.
Now at 77 she is planning to confront another new frontier, the outcasts
in Sudan.

<h> Not a Mother Teresa </h>

  Even as a young religious sister, Emmanuelle wanted to move out with the
poor and dedicate her life in total service to them. But community rules
prevented this. For decades, the nun had to be content serving God's people
as a teacher.
  "My superior told me that if I felt it necessary to live with the poor,
then I should feel free to go. For me, I am not like Mother Teresa of Calcutta.
She was in the same situation. She decided to leave her congregation (the
Loreto Sisters) and go alone and live with the poor. But Mother Teresa,
I think, is very strong. I am Sister Emmanuelle. I believed that if I left
my congregation I would leave a part of my strength behind", recalled the
nun.
  These years were extremely fruitful for Emmanuelle. She became a very
successful teacher and during this time, God prepared her with new insights
for the future. Rules and priorities changed dramatically following the
Second Vatican Council.
  Permission was granted to many religious to go out into the world and
become visible people with the poor. One of the first to leave community
life was Emmanuelle.

<h> Real poverty </h>

 On arrival in Alexandria, Egypt, the French nun came face to face with
real poverty. The children she was now teaching were so different from those
in Europe. Most of them were not properly fed.
  "Many families could only afford beans. In the convent we were used to
eating meat", remarked Sister Emmanuelle.
  One day she was visiting a very deprived family and noticed a tiny one-room
shack in the backyard. She asked the family why eight people were crammed
into two rooms and this other area was empty.
  "Nobody wants to live in there because it is very damp", replied the mother.
  Immediately Sister Emmanuelle wrote to her superior requesting permission
to move into this shack.
  The professor was now with the people she loved. She made her home in
the tiny shack and ate beans with the family. However, the board that
Emmanuelle paid did allow the household to eat some meat.
  It was the Papal Nuncio in Cairo who first directed the sister's path
towards the Zabbaleen garbage tip.
  "You want to share your life with the poor?", he asked. "Then come with
me to the slums."

<h> Rejected - unloved </h>

  The archbishop had been alerted to the grinding poverty in the nearby
garbage tip by a 12-year-old boy. The Papal Nuncio had noticed the lad coming
to his house each day to collect the rubbish. One day the archbishop went
home with the boy. He witnessed a community of people struggling for life
amidst mountains of garbage. In the summer months the area was the breeding
ground for millions of flies; it was a seething mass of disease. He had
come across a neighbourhood, mainly representing the Coptic Christian
tradition, who were totally rejected and unloved by their society.
  "Will you help me Sister Emmanuelle?", enquired the Nuncio.
  Many of her Egyptian friends thought the Papal Nuncio was mad to allow
a woman to go and live in this district. She was warned that the Zabbaleen
people were killers and thieves. They drank and smoked hashish. This was
no place for one of God's holy sisters.
  Disciplined - yes, but still very independent was Sister Emmanuelle. To
live with the despised and poor was something she believed God had always
called her to do. All she could think about were the words of St. Paul:
"I can do anything with Jesus Christ who strengthens me".
  "It was because nobody wanted to go there that I felt in my heart that
someone must help. So I went", smiled Sister Emmanuelle.

<h> Leading her donkey </h>

  She entered Zabbaleen leading her donkey, taking with her a bed, a small
table, a water jug and her Bible. The community was amazed to see this European
woman and her donkey.
  Arrangements had been made for her to move into an abandoned hovel. The
shanty was home to some birds and goats.
  "I took away the pigeons and put the goats in the yard with the pigs.
I swept where it was necessary and set up my things", explained the sister.
  Almost straight away she was out with the people.
  "Some of them might be killers, but if you smile and look at them with
respect and shake their hand they will never take out their knives and kill
you", she said.
  The biggest problem the Sion nun experienced was the filth of the area.
Everything she touched was dirty. Water had to be bought and carried into
the district. Quickly she felt deep frustration. So much disease. So many
sick and malnourished people and only one body to help them.
  "Never did I feel like giving up. I love these people too much and they
love me so much. When you love somebody you want to share in their lives.
That is what Jesus did", said Sister Emmanuelle.

<h> Taught by poor </h>

  The Sion nun brought love, medical and nutritional assistance to the children
and the women, but they in turn taught the philosophy professor so much.
Firstly they showed her the meaning of patience. Many of the women at Zabbaleen
were victims of savage beatings, inflicted by their husbands.
  "I could not bear for somebody to beat me. I would run away, but these
women bore it", she whispered.
  Once she was treating a mother who had sustained head injuries after a
beating from her husband. The sister advised the woman to take her children
and go. Emmanuelle explained that she would help support the woman.
  "I cannot", replied the mother. "If I go with my children, they will suffer.
They love their father so much. If I leave my children they will suffer.
I don't want that to happen. It is myself who has to serve. I will stay."
  The poor taught the sister the Christ-like meaning of sharing. "A poor
woman, one very hot night, gave me all her water and all her bread. The
most precious thing you have in summer in a slum is water. The woman was
a Muslim."
  Sister Emmanuelle has been a member of the Zabbaleen community for about
14 years. Life in this grotesque corner of Cairo has begun to change, not
through one person, but because of a partnership between one nun and thousands
of garbage collectors. Their aim is to build a house for each family. To
have every child on the tip going to school. (When Sister Emmanuelle arrived
only 10 went to school, now hundreds are attending.) The barren landscape,
scarred by mountains of rubbish, is now starting to grow trees and flowers.
One section of the area has electricity; Sister Emmanuelle is organizing
the electricity connection to the whole district. The men are busy digging
wells to draw fresh water.
  Old soldiers never die, they just fade away, goes the old saying. What
happens to old nuns? They just go on undertaking bigger and bigger ministries.
Sister Emmanuelle wants to extend her work to slum dwellers in Sudan. 
              
</subsample>


<subsample><id> D09b </id>

<source> World Vision News - July 1986 </source>

<h> Love Loaf </h>

  Tonight, millions of people around the world will sit down to a three-course
meal, in a comfortable dining-room.
  Tonight, hundreds of millions of people will not sit down to a three-course
meal, in a house that is only one room.
  That's why World Vision International Clubs are launching the Love Loaf
appeal - they see the little plastic loaves as a constant and close reminder
of the needs of others, who often seem so far away.
  For those who've never heard of a Love Loaf, it is a small bread-shaped
container, which serves as something of a mini collection-box for World
Vision. Its purpose is much wider than that however - WVI Clubs see the
Love Loaf as an ideal way to build up interest within their home.
  WVI Clubs national co-ordinator, Elaine Harris, has an ultimate goal for
the Love Loaf. She wants to see one in every home in Australia and she is
confident that goal is not impossible. All the WVI Clubs around Australia
will be working actively to promote the Love Loaf and will be distributing
them widely.
  Elaine Harris believes there is an endless list of places suitable for
Love Loaves - not only homes, but offices, churches, shops, banks and petrol
stations.
  "You could put a Love Loaf in your car, for instance, and when you pull
up to buy petrol and have spare change, you could put it in the Love Loaf.
Every little bit adds up", says Elaine.
  A Love Loaf filled with dollar coins adds up to about $200 and that money
could buy several Ethiopian farmers an Agpak kit, made up of tools, seeds
and fertilizer, giving those people a chance to rebuild their lives after
years of famine and drought.
  People wishing to join the Love Loaf program can write to Elaine Harris,
World Vision, Box 399C GPO Melbourne 3001.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D09c </id>

<source> World Vision News - July 1986 </source>

<h> Peace with God &amp; world peace </h>

<bl> By Rev Sir Alan Walker </bl>

  There cannot be peace at the circumference of life while disharmony reigns
at the centre of life. To be separated from God transmits seismic repercussions
to every level of human affairs. To become reconciled with God is to be
reconciled with everything in His world. Peace with God alone makes possible
world peace.
  To become alienated from God has enormous consequences. From separation
from God come divided, broken personalities. Inner turmoil and conflict
project themselves into human relationships creating tension and division.
Disturbed, discordant, distracted personalities operating in corporate
situations set people against people. When broken personalities achieve
positions of power, as seen in Hitler, they can become a cause of war.

<h> Social righteousness </h>

  Peace is impossible without social righteousness. Righteousness means
social justice, yet goes beyond justice. It is both a gift from God and
an achievement between human beings. It links together personal salvation
and social redemption.
  Peace cannot come while half the human race lives in abject poverty. Every
shanty town in Latin America, every slum in India or Pakistan, every starving
tribe in Ethiopia, are helpless potential causes of conflict and war.
  Peace cannot come while Aborigines are denied land rights in Australia
and while 22 million Blacks in South Africa suffer under apartheid, the
vilest racism since slavery.
  Peace cannot come while women are treated with exclusion and discrimination
in the fundamentalist Islamic states of Iran, Sudan and Pakistan.
  Peace cannot come while totalitarian regimes of the "left" and the "right"
hold people in bondage, directing their thinking and restraining their
movement. 
  Peace cannot come while the United States and Soviet Union divert vast
resources which could lift the burden of world poverty, to the wasteful,
senseless, blasphemous nuclear arms race.

</subsample>

</sample>




<sample><id> D10 </id>

<source> Checkpoint </source>

<note> 2014 words </note>

<subsample><id> D10a </id>

<source> Checkpoint - June 1986 </source>

<h> Camels, decisions and aeroplanes </h>

<bl> by Don Campbell </bl>

<misc> General Secretary of the Queensland with Northern NSW Branch </misc>

In one of the smallest but most penetrating of all the parables of Jesus,
He uses the illustration of a camel passing through the eye of a needle
(Luke 18:25). 'It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God.'

Over the years, all sorts of explanations have been made to try to let at
least a few rich men have the chance to get into the Kingdom of God. Some
have suggested that the word for camel was a mistake and it should be a
similar word that means a thick string or small rope. Others have felt the
needle might refer to a small door set in a larger door and sometimes referred
to as the eye of a needle.

There is no real reason for saying any of these ideas is correct. The point
is that Jesus is simply saying that it is impossible to put a camel through
the eye of a needle and so it is impossible for a rich man to enter the
Kingdom of God.

He means, of course, a rich man using his riches. It would apply to a wise
man using his intelligence or a beautiful person using their beauty.

Entry into the Kingdom of God is through faith in Jesus Christ and all He
did. There is no other way!

BUT, Jesus told this parable to a rich man who was not able to put his wealth
and possessions in the proper place. Instead of God being first in his life,
his wealth was!

For people in Australia today this camel business has two main lessons.

  1. People's desire for money and possessions can still stop them from
  entering the Kingdom of God. (By the way, remember that almost all
  Australians [even our very poor] are wealthy beyond the wildest dreams
  of much of the world's population!)

  2. Christians are just as prone to the danger of having money and possessions
  in the wrong place in their scheme of living. This is clear from reading
  the whole passage in which the camel bit is set. (Luke 18)

In fact, in our Australian society the pressure exerted on Christians and
non-Christians to over-emphasize money and possessions is enormous. 

Money and possessions are but part of what we are entrusted with. We have
all sorts of gifts, talents, interests, opportunities and areas of life
to develop that have the potential to be much more satisfying and productive
than mere dollars and cents will allow.

So then we can see how this money/possessions pressure affects our attitude
to ...

<h> DECISIONS </h>

Oh dear, this is a sticky subject for so many people. They have such a problem
with making decisions.

Some people find having to choose between Corn Flakes or Weet-Bix at breakfast
almost guarantees nervous tension for the rest of the day.

Yet most decisions should be made easily and carefully. God probably doesn't
really care what cereal we have for breakfast or even if we have a second
cup of tea or not.

If we go to buy a new shirt or dress it's a matter of what we like related
to quality and cost.

And it's the same with buying a car. It's a case of what we need as opposed
to quality, reliability, cost of travel over a period relating to initial
outlay and so on. Of course a car costs more than a shirt or dress. And
a house costs more than a car ...

Our society adds pressure to buy bigger, better and more expensive things.
This may not be what we need in all honesty, but to buy the cheapest may
not in the long run be the wisest.

The agony that so many Christians go through in deciding what to buy is
amazing. And the deadening effect that superannuation has on many people
is almost beyond belief.

YET, they can decide on a marriage partner with little or no hassle.

AND as far as a decision to offer for missionary service - it's no problem.
God doesn't want me for sure because I haven't felt any call to go overseas.

BUT have these same people felt any call to stay here? Or to put it another
way, has God clearly said to you that you are not wanted overseas? So this
leads to the mention of ...

<h> AEROPLANES </h>

Quite simply, when we send missionaries overseas or to North Australia they
travel by aeroplane.

Out of all this there is a challenge to spend some time thinking and praying
in two areas.

  <h>1. The Camel Syndrome </h>

What is your attitude to money and possessions? Really, what place do they
have in your thinking, attitudes and general direction in life. When you
read the incident in Luke Chapter 18 you find the man who was talking to
Jesus couldn't follow Him because his possessions had first  place  in his
life.

  <h>2. Decisions </h>

Do you agonize over decisions about things that don't really matter and
fail to even think about areas where even a little thought would soon demand
a major decision?

The classic case is, of course, the question about serving God in another
culture!

The question to ask is not 'Lord, should I ...?'

The question is really 'Lord, why not me?'

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D10b </id>

<source> Checkpoint - June 1986 </source>

<h> Lay Trainer, plus ... </h>

<h> MARGARET THORNTON ON THE JOB IN THE DIOCESE OF NAKURU </h>

What ingredients go into making a good Lay Trainer, plus ...? For Margaret
Thornton it is possibly living in Kenya over almost 20 years, experi+ence
in office administration and ac+counting, theological training and pas+toral
experience, and not the least important, having a builder for a dad!

Designing buildings may not be No.#1 priority for Margaret, but at the Bishop's
request she consulted with the principal of Berea Bible Institute, the Revd
S Njiihia to do a floor plan for the new kitchen and dining room there.
'We often used to find ourselves poring over house plans with dad,
who used to ask us as teenagers to help him do the calculations for his
plans,' says Margaret. 'No experience is ever wasted!'

Last year, lecturing in Christian Edu+cation at the Bible Institute featured
amongst Margaret's priorities. This year she is not lecturing because she
is coaching the new diocesan Accounts Clerk and trying to get the diocesan
accounts up to date.

The thing that is Margaret's No. 1 priority, however, is Lay Training and
the Theological Education by Exten+sion program of which she is director.
Last year David Kiiru Kamau joined her as co-worker. A former school teacher,
David also has clerical and book+keeping training, and has a real calling
to the lay training work. Sixty or more TEE groups meet throughout the
dio+cese. These they try to visit regularly and travel, either by motor
cycle, car or public transport can often be hazardous. On rural roads, with
pot+holes and corrugations they may come home covered in red dust, or find
it takes one hour to drive 6 kilometres - depending on the weather!

The encouragements in Margaret's work are to see TEE groups, like the Gathuthi
group, increasing in numbers and enrolments, and also to have a co-worker
to help encourage the group leaders, as well as the 400 students. Without
supervision the groups soon lose heart and break up quickly.

So, for Margaret, with experience in several areas, it may not be easy to
work out the priorities, especially when each aspect of the work is important.
Probably as long as people remain the priority, the rest will fall into
place.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D10c </id>

<source> Checkpoint - June 1986 </source>

<h> Pamplona Baja </h>

<bl> Norman H. Hart </bl>

Pamplona Baja is one of the many hundreds of 'new' housing develop+ments
(Pueblos Jovenes) that sur+round Lima and most other cities of Latin America.
People come to the cities in search of a better life than the one they knew
in the mountains. They arrive with only what they carry on their backs and
maybe with their families. If they are lucky these people may know someone
in the city where they can stay for a while until they become oriented.

San Juan de Miraflores, of which Pamplona Baja is a district, is some twenty
years old. Many of the houses are quite soundly constructed, but others
are not and are thereby a risk to health and life. Floors may still be of
dirt while the whole family and its animals may share one room. The poverty
which forces them to live in such conditions also prevents the people from
buying good food and obtaining proper health care. Tubercu+losis is a major
killer with 85% of the population affected by the disease to some extent
or other.

In this context the Community House exists in Pamplona Baja. Originally
begun five years ago as a refuge for single mothers, it has grown and changed,
adapting to the needs of the local community. The house is a centre for
worship, Bible study, prayer and fellowship on Sundays and during the week.
It is the office for the social worker, while for the nurse it is a surgery.
It is a site for a leather workshop where young men are taught a trade to
supplement family incomes or to help pay for their tertiary education. It
is the home of two of the community leaders and their families. It is a
school for the adult literacy programme, where twenty to thirty ladies learn
to read and write Spanish which is not their native language. The centre
also runs a kindergarten for thirty children of the poorest families, a
Sunday school and a youth group.

The Rev Tony Michael acts as a pastor for the community; his wife Priscilla,
in conjunction with Epifania and Esperanza, co-ordinates the social work.
The community has opted to provide sustained care for individuals and their
families, not just a supple+ment to government services. About twenty patients
are provided with drugs for T.B. under the supervision of a volunteer doctor
who visits when required. Priscilla and Epifania go regularly to twelve
of the fifty govern+ment schools in the area to teach basic hygiene related
to T.B., typhoid, ve+nereal disease, drug addiction and sex education. The
centre helps to find employment, visits community mem+bers in Lima jails,
advises people on how to deal with government depart+ments, how to care
for themselves and their families and helps them to realise that they are
sons and daughters of God and important to him.

Where possible, the centre also helps in first aid and a limited supply
of drugs for emergencies and severely poor people. When available, food
supplements are given to patients and their families. Milk is given to
kinder+garten children. Clothing is provided if available and necessary.
The de+pression and distress which are a natural consequence of the life-style
and illness in the Pueblo Joven means that there must be frequent and often
lengthy visitation to support patients and their families. Often there are
deaths and some families can lose members at such an alarming rate that
there is little prospect of a third generation. Here the Church is trying
to help people survive. This means that the gospel in Peru must be wholistic
- it must relate to the whole person. Pamplona Baja has chosen this course.

While in country areas some mis+sionaries have undertaken the task of preparing
scripture and liturgies in Ay+mara and Quechua, in Lima Spanish
is the lingua franca and any progress the people make must be in that language.
Most would deny any knowledge of an indian language because that is seen
as a social stigma. The missionary is usually using Spanish as a second
language also and in these circum+stances misunderstandings can often occur
making communication a trial but also a joy in learning together.

Pamplona Baja has many needs - a library for use by students in the district;
drugs for T.B. patients at three hundred and fifty dollars a year for each
one; Bibles for the growing Christian community. 
   
</subsample>

</sample>



<sample><id> D11 </id>

<source> On The Move </source>

<note> 2025 words </note>

<subsample><id> D11a </id>  

<source> On The Move - January 1986 </source>

<h> Models of ministry </h>

<bl> by George Browning </bl>

When the day of Pentecost came, the disciples were gathered together in
one place when they suddenly experienced a transforming power which was
to change their whole way of behaving. 

What did in fact transform them? Was it the cross itself? Was it an empty
tomb? Was it meeting the risen Jesus? Was it Pentecost?

It was probably a combination of all of these, especially viewed with the
benefit of hindsight. In any case their experience of what it meant to
be a church was quite differ+ent from the models they had perhaps imagined
while Jesus was alive.

One of these models is seen in Mark 20:20 where James and John and their
mother had a definite model in mind of what it would be like to serve the
Kingdom of God. This model was obviously unacceptable to Jesus with its
emphasis upon privilege, power and status, but do not many of our parishes
operate from this model?

It appears that Judas had another model in mind, equally unacceptable to
Jesus. While we may not see his model being used anywhere in the church
in Australia we certainly observe it in a rather horrific way in the march
of Islam in many parts of the world, for was not Judas' model one of
revolution and conversion by coercion?

I would like us to examine some of the possible models which are used,
consciously or unconsciously, in parishes throughout Australia today. As
I present these models I am conscious that there are many other variations
and that no one will necessarily be the model from which you are work+ing,
but I hope they will assist you in asking honestly where you are at, and
help you explore where it is that you would like to be.

<h> I  THE MODEL OF THE `KING` </h>

In this model the rector or vicar is totally dominant and puts his stamp
completely upon the parish. It is most likely that he will totally disregard
any possibility that the parish had a story of its own before he came and
will insist that his story is the one which will dominate. The model assumes
that he has all the gifts and that in some way the Holy Spirit works through
him to others.

The model denies the possibility that others can reflect the light of the
gospel in `different colours'. It is unlikely that renewal can take place
through this model. Unfortunately the model is all too frequently observed.
One parish priest at his induction last month announced that the parish
would now return to the truth of Catholic experience and that he would dictate
what would, or would not, be allowed to continue. He also laid down as 
unnegotiable the title by which he was to be known.

The model has some attractions about it. It offers security; there are no
risks. You know exactly where you stand and the path to salvation is clearly
laid down.

<h>2  THE MANAGING DIRECTOR </h>

I have a hunch that this is probably the most popular model at a parish
and diocesan level. It is popular because it can give the impression that
the people of God are being nurtured, that there is mutual ministry, while
in fact there is none. It may even be a more dangerous model than the first
because people can be misled into thinking that there is real mutuality
when there is not.

In this model the rector is still basically in charge of dictating the `story',
and people are on the whole given jobs to do rather than sharing ministry.
There is no real sense of mutual accountability and jobs are handed out
largely at the rector's initiative and discretion. There is unlikely to
be mutuality in decision making.

Because the model is geared towards tasks being done rather than the building
up of people, it is likely that jobs will be handed out without much
consideration being given to appropriate motivational gifts. We have in
this case the danger of people feeling guilty and/or hurt when the given
task is rejected or completed badly.

This model encourages people to `take a holiday' for a while when they perceive
their usefulness in terms of the task performed rather than in the giving
of themselves.

It is probable that in this model little is really being done in terms of
mutual ministry or in renewal.

<h>3  A MODEL OF MUTUAL MINISTRY - BASED UPON TASKS RATHER THAN GIFTS </h>

This model of mutual ministry, or one like it, operates in a number of
parishes. It is based upon function rather than gift and has the rector
still centrally placed in the model. (Is it possible in Anglicanism to have
a model where he is not centrally placed?)

This model is a fluid one, and rather than answering ques+tions it keeps
asking other ones.

- With how many people is it possible to work in a mean+ingful way?

- If there is a ministry team should they be `licensed', if so by whom and
for how long? Does it include a contract, and who may alter it?

- Who discerns the areas of ministry?

- At this particular stage of the life of the church in Australia should
those who are part of the main team be deacons? Can you be a deacon and
cease being a deacon?

- What `standing' do those have who are not part of the main team?

- What areas of mutuality should be expected of those who belong together
in this way? Prayer? Fellowship? Teaching? Social interaction? etc.

<h> 4  A MODEL FOR MUTUAL MINISTRY - BASED UPON MOTIVATIONAL GIFTS RATHER THAN TASKS </h>

I offer this model to you as one who is not a card carrying charismatic.
I am not even a real clapper or hugger. I also offer this model being very
conscious that I am being most simplistic and that I am introducing an element
here and thereby seeming to imply that that element is absent from other
models, i.e. the work of the Holy Spirit. This is plainly untrue, but I have
chosen to draw the model in this way for the purpose of contrast with the
hope that you may take from any or all of these models and create your own
which you may feel will assist you in the renewal of your parish.

In this model I am suggesting that the base principle is not task but person,
and that in the choice or call of a person one may well look for that
particular gift that brings balance to the whole. I have a hunch that the
most unpopular gift is that of prophecy - speaking the truth - and hence
there are very few prophets amongst parish clergy! It may be that you will
consciously choose a mercy giver as the chairman of the pastoral care program,
but in so doing you will take great care to make sure that within this team
there is an enabler, a teacher etc.

It is not that a person has a monopoly of one of these gifts and none of
the others, but it is true that each of us is likely to major in one
and be less gifted in the others. I have a hunch that most parishes prefer
exhorters as rectors, but it may be that the parish has grown strong enough
in its mutual ministry to consciously seek a prophet, or perhaps on the
other hand a mercy giver and not expect a prophet or teacher.

Whichever model we use, we should be conscious of it, be happy to sit with
it, and `own' the implications of it.


The Venerable George Browning is the Archdeacon of the Central Coast in
the Anglican Diocese of Newcastle, N.S.W. This article is extracted, with
his permission, from a much longer paper entitled `God's Family at Home:
renewal and enrichment of parish ministry'. In the presentation of the paper
at a gathering of Anglican clergy the various models were presented in diagram
form.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D11b </id>

<source> On The Move - January 1986 </source>

<h> Power in the church </h>

<bl> by Brian L. Smith </bl>

At a regional synod of the Methodist Church in 1976, Queensland National
Party Senator Stan Collard stated that he had learnt his politics in the
Methodist Church in North Queensland. As expected this remark was greeted
with laughter. It was not however the laughter of Christians who thought*though
such a statement was ludicrous, but rather of those who could identify with
the claim because they knew all too well the truth that lay behind it. They
had experienced first hand the struggles and manoeuver+ing for power that
characterise the life of many parishes and congregations.

Whenever and wherever a number of human beings are gathered for a com+mon
purpose - whether it be a sporting club or a multinational corporation,
a kindergarten committee or a state - there will inevitably be a struggle
for power, a quest by some to exert their will over others which may be
met with acceptance, resignation or resistance. The church, even with its
divine origins and purpose, is comprised of a number of human beings and
as such is no less susceptible to power struggles than any other grouping
of people.

Many opportunities for the church to experience the liberating power of
the gospel within its own life and structures are lost because this simple
fact concern+ing the reality of its life is either not recognised or is
deliberately ignored.

A young minister in his first parish lay sleepless, metaphorically pulling
the knives out of his back after a particularly torrid church meeting. In
the small hours of the morning after a painstaking analysis of the meeting,
he came to the conclusion that the whole thing could only be understood
in terms of different people trying in various ways to assert power over
others. To his surprise, when he later applied this analysis to a broad
sweep of parish activities, he discovered that it could account for many
incidents which to that point had appeared puzzl+ing and unconnected. Because
he had stumbled across the reality of the struggles to exercise power that
underlay much of parish life at that time, he was able for the first time to
gain an in+tegrated and comprehensive under+standing of the situation in
which he sought to serve.

Many Christians are not so fortunate. How many ministers have toiled hard
but made little headway because they have not understood the structures
of power that were already operating amongst lay people in the parish or
con+gregation to which they have been call+ed? How many gifted, caring lay
people have found themselves unable to break into an `in group' and so have
never been allowed to participate fully in a congre+gation and make their
unique contri+bution to its life and witness?


<h> Rationalisation and denial </h>

The major reasons why we fail to identify power struggles in the church
for what they are may be summarised as ration+alisation and denial.

Rationalisation:  Very few Christians who want to exercise power and become
involved in power struggles actually see themselves in this light. In their
own minds they are always involved in some+thing far more noble: `a matter
of prin+ciple', `right doctrine', `the responsibility the church has given
me in this matter', `the better ordering of the church's life', `our concern
about what is happening to our people'. I do not want to suggest that whenever
any of these or similar phrases are used they always hide a more ambivalent
motivation. However, we all need to recognise that whereas we might identify
the desire to exerise power as a motivation in someone else, we are rarely
able to discern the same motivation in ourselves. We readily rationalise
our own desires for power under more worthy aspirations.

Denial:  As Christians we are aware that power struggles are not only a
characteristic of human life but also a symptom of its brokenness, and as
they are also aware that Jesus' comment on the dominating exercise of power
over others was `it shall not be so among you' (Mark 10:43), many deny the
existence of power struggles and domination in the church. 

</subsample>

</sample>



<sample><id> D12 </id>

<source>  S.U. News </source>

<note> 2012 words </note>

<subsample><id> D12a </id>

<source> S.U. News - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> Of volleyball and leadership </h>

<bl> By Pat Jenkins </bl>

My experience of playing volleyball, limited as it had been, had helped me
evolve a set of rules which I felt minimized my humiliation on those occasions
when participation was unavoidable. These rules included such basics as:
position yourself as inconspicuously as possible, quietly step away from
the ball when you see it coming so it is not quite as blatantly obvious
that you are the one responsible for the lost point, call to other team 
members "yours" whenever possible, make many jokes about anything else to
keep people's minds off the game at hand, apologise when you misdirect the
ball as if such occurrences were an unusual surprise, excuse yourself for
an important job awaiting you when the revelation of your total inadequacy
is imminent etc. etc. You know, the usual stuff.

Then last year, at our Annual National Conference for S.U. schools staff,
volleyball, unfortunately, became the filler of the breaks between sessions.
My rule of thumb (avoid being seen on the court), which supersedes all of
the above rules, was brought into play.

But one day the most utterly awful thing occurred. I was told that some
hopelessly misguided woman had challenged the male staff to a men versus
women game the following day, and numbers being what they were, they needed
me to play. I felt sick, my heart pounded, my palms sweated. The only thing
worse than looking individually foolish is to be part of a group which looks
collectively foolish. Please Lord, could we be raptured now? 

And then Chris O'Gorman, from Qld. staff, stepped in. In the growing dark
of dusk she gathered us on the courts and gave us some coaching. First,
a few basic rules - you may do this, you need to do that, this is illegal.
Then some tips: the only call is "mine", don't apologise, capitalize on
the male tendency to hog the ball. Then some practical suggestions: hold
your hand like this, hit the ball with this arm motion, play as a team in
this way. Then some practice: form yourselves in a semi circle, hit the
ball back to me in this way, then back to the next person, then in this
other way. Soon my heart palpitations were at a more manageable*managable 
level.

If the aim of the match was to have it be of the highest standard possible
during this staff gathering, then I had no place being on the court.
She should have told me to resort to my usual "preparing tonight's session",
or "need to have a deep and meaningful with..." etc. But if (as indeed it
was) the aim was to have participation, and to improve the playing ability
and hence, enjoyment, of each individual player, then I definitely needed
to play. That only had a point if I had a coach's guidance. But if, then,
I experienced the pleasure of following her serving tips and the satisfaction
of winning a point, maybe later in the year I would play again, this time
without the coach around. Hence the "nett" amount of participation/improvement
in volleyball by staff would increase. More so than if just the experienced
players had got further practice in the big match. So, I was part of the
team.

The next day the prayed-for tornado did not hit and we were forced, instead,
to play volleyball. The first game we lost 15/3, the second 15/8, the third
15/12. My relief at the game's conclusion, although heartfelt, was actually
less heartfelt than ever before. Because I had seen in Chris a superb leader
in action. When the ball came her way she handled it quietly and powerfully.
But mostly, her role had been to allocate, guide, train and review - all
of which had the effect of simply inspiring confidence - and that was enough
to transform our (my) performance.

And that's the aim of the Leadership Conferences which we in the schools
area of Scripture Union NSW run each May holidays: to provide an environment
where confidence is inspired and leadership skills are developed amongst
our Inter School Christian Fellowship students and amongst the teams which
lead them. There used to be just one conference, where the high school ISCF
kids who were good at leading, got better. That was valuable. But now there
are 8 conferences - and so vast numbers of the delegates who come don't
have much background in leadership or teaching at all. A bit like me and
volleyball. But, with conferences which are carefully planned, to maximise
participation by students, and to provide guidance, training and evaluation,
students and team members go home much more confident and skilled than when
they arrive.

Always, there were the basic rules: God is sovereign, lean on him. You're
not alone in your school. Use the power of the Holy Spirit within you. Spend
time daily in prayer and Bible Study.

Then, team members do some of the "performing" - Jeff Fletcher and Cailey
Moore at the Conference in Tamworth directed by Helen McNab gave a powerful
and moving mime about temptation and loyalty in relationships. This was
a prelude to their evening devoted to discovering biblical principles relevant
to dating. David Griffin role modelled creative learning exercises in the
Bible Studies he led at Fitzroy Falls (Director, Elizabeth Taylor) with
paper aeroplanes delegates made - one wing representing "lips", the other
"life". Make a plane without either wing and, no matter how good that wing,
the plane won't fly. Make a plane with lips and life wings and ... whammo!

And then came the tips. Martin Cowling led the "Presenting Yourself Up Front"
skills workshops at a Mt. Victoria Conference - Director, Rob Maidment.
And with it came the participation - Pupils who elected that interest area
of Martin's were then responsible for running all the evening sessions -
including selection of music, prayer, telling about individual school groups,
book reviews etc. And there were the practice runs. Wayne Deeth took this
training a step further at the Fitzroy Falls Conference, and there, utilising
video equipment, students were able to analyse their own annoying mannerisms,
distracting habits etc. Their eagerness for evaluation after their turns
up front reflected a new confidence and determination to take this role
seriously - and woe betide any team member who failed to meet the preparation
criteria established by the group as required!

There were also the practical suggestions - delegates were guided in programme
planning, resource utilisation, &amp; choice of ISCF meeting ideas. Roslyn
Johnston, at the Morisset Conference - director, Neville Hatton - produced
a superb 8 page booklet on planning an ISCF programme. She led kids through
workshops which had them scurrying for drama group phone numbers, Bible
Study references, Input magazine back issues etc.

And over and over again was the actual execution - learning by doing, learning
by doing, learning by doing. If the aim was to have top quality "presentations"
at conference, only the experienced teachers would be up front. But it wasn't.
The aim was to increase participation so that, having worked under close
guidance and experienced the "I can do it" feeling, students would return
home and be better equipped to initiate and take responsibility there.

I visited four of these conferences and will go to a fifth in the Hunter
Region (which we put off till the August holidays so as not to compete with
the Evangelism Explo Newcastle held in May). Jon Tigwell visited the other
three.

At my very last visit, the inevitable occurred: they organised a volleyball
match for the break between Bible Studies and research (Wombat) groups,
and I was invited to play.

Six months had elapsed since national conference. The sweaty palms, beating
heart, desperate futile searching for someone who surely needed me for deep
and meaningful conversation - all returned. With a quietly muttered "Chris
O'Gorman, where are you?" I meekly walked onto the court. And you know what?
Although we lost dismally (15-2, 15-4, 15-7), somewhere amongst those smaller
scores is a point I won! I was elated.

And back in the high schools all over NSW there are literally hundreds of
Christian kids who have returned from Leadership Conferences and who are
participating in I.S.C.F. groups in their schools. They are removed from
the team members who encouraged and guided them. And they may still get
nervous, forget things, lack sufficient preparation, get things mixed up.
But they are bravely (a) doing their bit, and (b) seeing far more fruit
for their efforts than ever before. I thank God for that.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D12b </id>

<source>  S.U. News - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> Alive to GOD </h>

<h> AN EXCITING NEW BIBLE-READING EXPERIENCE FROM SCRIPTURE UNION </h>

Scripture Union, whose Bible-reading notes have a total worldwide circulation
of 1,300,000 in 58 languages, has just taken a major step forward.

A fresh and lively approach to God's word.

Hot off the press comes ALIVE TO GOD, a brand new series of Bible-reading
notes for adults. This vibrant new series was launched at Scripture Union's
recent Easter Conference in Adelaide.

`We're all excited by ALIVE TO GOD', said John Lane of the Scripture Union
National office at the launch. `It's designed for those who are starting
a daily time with God which they've never had before - and for those who
want to put a new life into the time they already spend with God each day.'

Colin Matthews, head of Scripture Union's Bible Use Department in London,
visited Australia for the launch. ALIVE TO GOD was `born' in his office,
but has been adapted for use in Australia and New Zealand. He said, ALIVE
TO GOD provides a fresh and lively approach to reading God's word. We've
subtitled it `Bible guidelines for living by the Spirit' because it also
offers practical applications and suggestions for prayer, praise, confession
and meditation.

ALIVE TO GOD will help Christians engage in active dialogue with God and
will bring to life that time we spend in God's presence each day.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D12c </id>

<source> S.U. News - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> Staff news </h>

<h> FAREWELL </h>

<bl> John Smartt - Western Ribbon </bl>

We said goodbye to John in May as he moved on to take up a position with
Mayne Nickless. John has done a great job for Scripture Union, firstly in
Darwin and then in the Western Ribbon working from an office in Penrith.
`Thank you John and Tracy for all the hard work you put into your time with
Scripture Union. We wish you God's richest blessing for the future.'
John hopes to continue to help us in various ways.

<h> Peter Walker - Communications Co-ordinator </h>

After nearly six years on the SU staff, Peter left at the end of May to
take the position of Communication Co-Ordinator with the Energy Commission.
Peter will be a great loss to us in Chalmers Street as of course he was
responsible for many of the publications that come to you from SU House.
(If you think this issue of SU News doesn't flow as well as usual, you now
know why!) Many of you will have met Peter at SU events and seen the result
of his photography sometimes to your surprise. Peter will continue to help
us particularly as Mission adviser for SUFM's in January.

<h> PLEASE PRAY </h>

Please pray for Marion Thorn, secretary for the Communications Department
as she has been very unwell for the last three months and after a major
operation is continuing under treatment from home. Pray for Marion and her
husband, Bob, and their two children.

<h> CONGRATULATIONS </h>

To Ralph and Diana Fairbairn on the birth of a second daughter, Heidi. Ralph
is the Gift Department Co-ordinator for SU.
To Joanne and Gary Akehurst on their marriage, May 31st. Joanne is the
receptionist at SU House.

<h> WELCOME </h>

GUILIO LESCHI, MANLY WARRINGAH LOCAL SCHOOLS WORKER.
Guilio joined the staff in April to work 2 days a week in the Manly Warringah
area. Guilio will work closely with the Manly Warringah area development
group and their chairman, Max Lindsay. The area are working hard at raising
the entire team support needed for Guilio and are excited at the potential
in their appointment. 

</subsample>

</sample>



<sample><id> D13 </id>

<source> Majellan Sunday Bulletin </source>

<note> 2037 words </note>

<subsample><id> D13a </id>

<source> Majellan Sunday Bulletin - 11 May 1986 </source> 

<h> Sharing the glory of Christ </h>

  On Ascension Day we prayed:
  "God mounts his throne to shouts of joy; a blare of trumpets for the Lord"
(Reponsorial Psalm); and: "May we follow Christ into the new creation, for
his ascension is our glory and our hope" (Opening Prayer). We gave thanks
for the glorification of Christ, and expressed the hope that we might one
day be caught up in that same triumph and joy.
  Today's liturgy takes its tone from the feast of the Ascension.
- The gospel features Jesus' own prayer that we should share his glory:
"Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am, so that they
may always see the glory you have given me."
- In the passage from the Apocalypse the risen Lord says: "Very soon now
I shall be with you again, bringing the reward," to which the Church responds
longingly: "Come, Lord Jesus."
- In the Acts of the Apostles' account of St. Stephen's martyrdom it is
recorded that the saint was given a vision of the ascended Lord.
  Actually today's reading from Acts says much more. It speaks not only
of Stephen's coming into the glory of Christ; it emphasises that this witness
to Jesus was first asked to duplicate the sufferings of his Lord. The parallels
between Stephen and Jesus in their respective deaths are deliberately spelt
out:

	- Both were brought before the Sanhedrin.
	- Both had false witness giving evidence against them.
 	- Both were accused of blasphemy.
	- Both were taken outside the city to be killed.
	- Both prayed for their enemies.
	- At the moment of death, both spoke an almost identical prayer:
	"Father, into your hands I commend my spirit." "Lord Jesus, receive
	my spirit."

  In all these parallels, St. Luke (who wrote the Acts) is saying: the life
of Jesus continues in the life of the Church; the disciple of Jesus, like
the Master, must take up the cross; if we aspire to union with Christ in
glory, we must first be prepared to endure for his love. As St. Paul put
it: "Yet so we suffer with him that we might also be glorified with him"
(Romans 8, 17); or again, in the words of St. Paul: 
  "All I want to know is Christ, and the power of his resurrection, and
to share his sufferings by reproducing the pattern of his death. That is
the way I can hope to take my place in the resurrection of the dead ... And
so I press on towards the prize which God calls us to receive in Christ
Jesus" (Philippians 3, 10-15).

                                 <bl> Max Barrett, C.SS.R. </bl>

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D13b </id>

<source> Majellan Sunday Belletin - 18 May 1986 </source>

<h> Another Paraclete </h>

  No matter how many books or articles we read on the subject the Holy Spirit
is always more difficult to picture than God the Father or God the Son.
But we get some help from today's Gospel.
  Jesus Christ speaks of sending "another Advocate". "If you love me you
will keep my commandments. I shall ask the Father and he will give you another
advocate to be with you forever".
  We really need a combination of words to describe the Holy Spirit and
His role. There is the Greek word Paraclete which means the person who is
called to the side of one in need of assistance, particularly in legal
processes. So from that we have words like advocate, intercessor, defender,
mediator, helper. Then there are other words like teacher, consoler, friend.
The Holy Spirit is all that and more.
  Today's Gospel also gives us another clue. By speaking of another Advocate,
Jesus seems to imply that He is the first Advocate and now there will be
another like Himself. So we can conclude that what Jesus did for His friends
during His life on earth, the new Advocate will continue to do for the
followers of Christ down through the ages. The Gospel (Jn 14) tells us He
is the spirit of truth ... that He will teach the disciples all truth and
bring to their minds what Jesus taught them ... He will bear witness to Jesus.
  So we can be sure the Holy Spirit is present in the Church today as He
has been for the past more than 1900 years. He is teaching and guiding the
Church enabling it to come to an ever deeper understanding and a more complete
grasp of the message of Christ. We can be sure He is still inspiring the
followers of Christ to remain steadfast in their faith, encouraging and
strengthening them to live by Christ's teaching and bring His message to
the world.
  The work of the Spirit is vividly demonstrated in today's First Reading
which describes the wonderful events of Pentecost. Although the apostles
had listened to Christ and seen Him do marvellous things, they really did
not understand Him or His mission. But with the coming of the Spirit everything
fell into place. They knew Christ as they had never known Him before and
wanted to tell the world about Him.
  Today we pray that the Holy Spirit will "continue to work in the world
through the hearts of all who believe" (Opening Prayer).

				              <bl> Wm. H. Stinson, C.SS.R. </bl>

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D13c </id>

<source> Majellan Sunday Belletin - 25 May 1986 </source>

<h> In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit </h>

  Do you remember what the priest (or some other minister of the Sacrament)
said when he poured the water on your head to baptize you? Most of us don't
of course because we were baptized as babies. But if we have attended a
baptism or two since then we have heard the words. And if we have received
some religious instruction we have learnt something about the Sacrament
there.
  The priest says, "I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the
Son and of the Holy Spirit."
  The words proclaim that we have entered into a new relationship with a
God who is one, yet somehow three.
  St. John tells us that "God is love". He is a community of love. His life
is a life of love - the love of the Father for the Son and of the Son for
the Father that is somehow personified in the Holy Spirit. The relationship
between Father and Son is lived in a Spirit of love.
  By our baptism we become part of that life of love. We share in the very
life of God.
  Indeed, in baptism we become one with Jesus Christ, the beloved Son of
the Father. So, like Jesus, we are now beloved sons and daughters of the
Father. We are children of God, members of His family. Like Jesus we can
address the Father familiarly ("Abba") as He does.
  Being joined with Christ, the Son, through our baptism means that we are
called to live in the Spirit of Christ. That is to say we are called to
love the Father as Christ loves the Father and we are called to love our
brothers and sisters as fellow children of the Father. Like Christ we are
called to live in a Spirit of love - love of the Father and love of others.
Jesus said, "You must love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all
your soul, and with all your mind" and "You must love your fellow-man as
yourself" (Mt. 22:37, 39).
  Jesus also told us that He came to do the will of the Father. His whole
life was an act of love of His Father. He invites us to see the Father as
the One towards whom our whole life must be oriented. He invites us to be
His co-workers in making the Father's kingdom come on earth - that is, to
help make the world a place of peace and love.
  The Father is the loving Creator who has given us the gift of life. Our
hearts were made for Him and they will not rest, will not find fulfilment,
until they learn to love Him in return for His love of us.
  God has chosen to reveal Himself to us in terms of family relationships
- something that is part of our experience. If we haven't experienced the
love of a parent or haven't experienced what it means to belong to a loving
family, we have at least seen something of what is meant in the lives of
other people.
  This does, of course, highlight the importance of loving parents and loving
families. They give us insight and understanding of what God had in mind
in revealing Himself in terms of Father, Son and the bond (Spirit) of love
between them.
  Today we celebrate the fact that God has revealed Himself as Trinity -
Father, Son and Holy Spirit. We recall that He has invited us to share in
His intimate life of love. And we remember that He calls us, through our
baptism, to share in the work, the mission, of the Beloved Son - making
the community of His love present in our world.
						  <bl> Neal Dwyer C.SS.R. </bl>

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D13d </id>

<source> Majellan Sunday Bulletin - 1 June 1986 </source>

<h> The Eucharist in our lives </h>

  Written a mere quarter-century after the death of Jesus, Paul's letter
to the Corinthians is most valuable because it shows the central place already
occupied by the Eucharist in christian worship.
  As at the Last Supper, so 25 years later at Corinth, the Eucharist was
celebrated in the context of a meal.
  The liturgical occasion was meant both to symbolise and to foster christian
unity.
  ("That they be one" had been Christ's prayer at the Last Supper. "As the
branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it abides in the vine, neither
can you, unless you abide in me" (John 15, 4). St. Paul told the Corinthians
(1 Cor. 10,17): it is Christ in the Eucharist who brings about this oneness.
"Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body, for we all partake
of the one bread.")
  An abuse had crept into the Corinthian church whereby unity was being
threatened. The christians there had split into factions. This was bad enough.
What was worse, their factionalism was being carried over into the celebration
of the Eucharist. Instead of joining together in a love-feast, the various
cliques remained apart. The poor went hungry; the rich over-indulged and
some even became drunk. This meant that they were not only shattering christian
unity; they were also sacrilegious in their unworthy reception of their
Lord.
  St. Paul dealt with this situation by recalling the tradition handed down
to him - and he quoted the sacred words of Christ in instituting the Eucharist.
Then Paul added: "As often as you shall eat this bread and drink this cup,
you proclaim the death of the Lord, until he comes. Therefore, whoever eats
this bread or drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily, will be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord."
  Today's feast of Corpus Christi invites reflection on many truths. For
instance:
  (a) As the fathers of Vatican II said, "The Mass is the centre of the
whole christian life." Without the Mass, the follower of Christ is necessarily
eccentric.
  (b) Our attendance at Mass and particularly our reception of Jesus in
Communion demand deep reverence.
  (c) In the sacrifice of the Mass, Jesus does not die again. Why, then,
does St. Paul say: "You proclaim the death of the Lord"?
  At the consecration of the Mass, Christ is truly present under the appearance
of bread and wine. And just as his glorified body is now eternally marked
by the five wounds, so does his glorified Person contain the unlimited merits
of his dying. At the Mass, Jesus comes to us with the unlimited richness
of his sacrificial death. In this wondrous sense we proclaim the death of
the risen Lord.
  (d) Christ's sacrifice transformed the world. At Mass, we are invited
to live our lives in ever-closer union with the Eucharistic Lord, allowing
him to transform each one of us personally.
					       <bl> Max Barrett, C.SS.R.</bl>

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D13e </id>

<source> Majellan Sunday Bulletin - 8 June 1986 </source>

<h> The Good News of Nain </h>

Today's gospel episode is related only by St Luke and, over and over, thenarrative bears the author's 'signature'.

Luke's gospel is characteristically marked by gentleness, a feeling for the poor, respect for women.

</subsample>

</sample>


<sample><id> D14 </id>

<source> Australia's New Day </source>

<note> 2011 words </note>

<subsample><id> D14a </id>

<source> Australia's New Day - July/August 1986 </source> 

<h> The gospel according to Saint Mick </h>

<bl> By Craig Bailey </bl>

  Paul Hogan calls his first film a `feel good movie'. He's right. I'm hardly
your average Australian bushman, but the crocodile poacher from Walkabout
Creek aroused my Aussie pride and, while not exactly having me rollicking
in the aisle, gave me quite a few laughs.
  Dundee may not boast the hi-tech stuff of George Lucas. It lacks the violence
of Rambo. Its characters are few and budget meagre next to the average American
film. But it's the most watched movie in Australia, and there's got to be
a good reason for that.
  Despite a sojourn in New York and an American co-star, Dundee is about
as Australian as you can get. As a hero, Mick Dundee leaves Ned Kelly, the
Man from Snowy River and Dame Edna for dead. The little Aussie battler has
grown up. No longer just anti-authority, poor victim of circumstance, purely
cynical, but a battler who takes on the world and wins. `That's why you
have so many accidents over here,' the outback bushman declares to a
thor+oughbred New Yorker. `Your steering wheel's on the wrong side of the
car!'
  Hogan trivializes his film when he describes the Oz imagination, the spirit
of Australia. We're too skeptical to be taken in by a flying kangaroo, but
a crocodile poacher, super barramundi fisherman who picks up King Browns
and casually flings them aside is almost believable, and very appealing.

<h> MATESHIP GOSPEL </h>

  What makes our new folk hero so attractive is this: he promotes a gospel
that is palatable, particularly to the male of the species. He is the sum
of how we like to think about ourselves.
  For starters, it is a gospel of mate+ship, an idea very much alive in
most Australians - the myth that keeps many from utter despair. If you can't
depend on your mates, what hope is there? In a land which by its sheer size
and harshness threatens to swallow us, mateship makes life bearable. A
sober+ing moment in Dundee's*dundee's gospel is served up in an elaborate
N.Y. party when, after being introduced to a lady who visits a `shrink',
he asks, `Hasn't she got any mates?'
  Mixed with respect for mateship is Dundee's contempt for superiority and
pretence, like table manners at an exclu+sive restaurant. Those who cross
his lines of acceptability usually become victims of a swift punch in the
mouth. Equally, his genuine concern for the underdog - the Aborigine, the
street girl - characterize*chracterize his `everyone's-me-mate' philosophy:
`Be in town for a couple 'a days. See ya round,' he offers from a taxi cab
window to one of New York's 7 million residents!
  Dundee's gospel is underscored by a kind of morality that is not far from
a believed-in (though not often practised), morality that is basic to the
Australian. It is a close-to-the-earth, survival moral+ity. Its highest
ideal is mateship and it's moulded by the land: land rights? `We belong
to the land, it doesn't belong to us,' says Crocodile Mick. While Rambo
is busy bulldozing his surroundings with guns and knives, and dispensing
justice with iron gloves, Dundee sur+vives rather than conquers, and his
primary weapon is his dry humour.
  It's the wit that characterizes the lighter side of Aussie morality -
it mocks the false and showy, but affec+tionately points to some great
Austra+lian truth - if nothing else, that life is to be enjoyed despite
adversity.
  Crocodile Dundee says a lot about the things many Australians value. Those
things are not entirely foreign to the Gospel. As John Hannaford points
out, `Jesus likes Aussies...He likes the way we care about the battler and
the underdog...' There are many things about Mick Dundee that I think Jesus
likes. If it's true that he characterizes the Australian experience of life
then could it be that we Christians need to spend less time condemning the
evil around us and recognising the good? Is it possible that in the process
we'd be able to present our Gospel in a more relevant fashion to our Australian
mates with+out compromising its content? `Me and God, we're mates,' says
Crocodile Dundee. Maybe with a more positive relevant Church, God could
become his Lord and Saviour as well.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D14b </id>

<source> Australia's New Day - July/August 1986 </source>

<h>10,700 CHAIRS...I THINK! </h>

<h> The Story behind Jubilee '86 </h>

<bl> By Peter Haran </bl>

  Many who attended last January's United Charismatic Convention in Adel+aide
may not be aware the whole event was captured on video tape by a top
professional film team.
  Up to 12 hours of video tape was put down, mixed, cut, edited and over+layed
with a multi-track audio to pro+duce a 40 minute presentation.
  The result is 10,700 Chairs, I Think, a title gleaned from a statement
by the chairman of the convention and Tabor College director Barry Chant.
An apt title too, there were about that many chairs in the huge Wayville
Pavillion on the night of January 7 when more than 10,000 individuals took
their seats to hear some of the best Christ+ian speakers in the world.
  Three of the best news cameramen in the country began filming the con+vention
long before the opening night, and the video explores the ground+work and
preparation which went into launching the biggest Charismatic convention
ever seen in South Aus+tralia.
  It also looks at the arrival of the three guest speakers - and guest solo+ist
- at Adelaide Airport, then moves into the yawning Wayville Pavillion before
those 10,000-odd chairs were laid out.
  The look at the behind-the-scenes operation is as fascinating as the four
day convention itself.
  A swirl of colour, a rising tide of beautiful music and the video is
eye+witness to a sea of human faces wait+ing in anticipation for the grand
event to get under way.
  The very best from the keynote speakers is included in the recently released
tape - Reinhard Bonnke, speaking on stage and at the open-air rally in Victoria
Square; Dr. Paul Yonggi Cho, telling of a miraculous healing; and Winkie
Pratney, who mixes the newspeak of today with the relevance of God's Word.
And, of course there is Barry McGuire urging all to join him in the story
of bullfrogs and butterflies.
  But the Jubilee Convention was more than just sermons and songs. It also
was people and changed lives. And this video cassette looks at the human
face of a mass gathering. It explores the range of emotions, the collective
worship and the response to the powerful word being delivered.
  In many respects 10,700 Chairs, I Think is a joyful reminder of a grand
and spiritual event. But it*is also jogs the memory in respect to those
telling messages that were delivered, by the world's best. It also is great
enter+tainment.
  Wait no more - it's now available.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D14c </id>

<source> Australia's New Day - July/August 1986 </source>

<h> Family Faith </h>

<bl> By Anne Fitzgerald </bl>

<h> LIVING ON LESS AND LIKING IT MORE </h>

  During 1985, our church held a seminar with Neil Milne, a missionary with
World Map. He challenged us toward the end of his message concerning the
words of Jesus, `If any man will follow Me, let him deny himself...' (Matt.
16:24). Neil said, `You may have something legitimate; you can have it,
but you deny yourself.' Neil had been talking to us about the Third World
countries and India in particular. I got to thinking about things the Lord
had been speaking to me during the previous year.
  There was a time when the poorer countries of the world were considered
`dark' countries that were steeped in idol worship, greatly disadvantaged
econom+ically and in need of God. Hence we very kindly sent out missionaries.
We were considered `blessed' to have everything they didn't have. They were
considered `cursed' because they didn't know God and suffered accordingly.
  Today, however, as the light of God penetrates their cultures, we find
that they have so much more than us spirit+ually, and are moving into the
supernatural manifestations of the Holy Spirit so much more easily than
we are. Meanwhile, we still have all the things they don't have, and more,
and seem to be missing out on the extent of the supernatural they are enjoying.
What has happened is that our materialistic society has caused us to become
clogged and bogged down, when it was designed to be a blessing for others
and our money a tool for God to use.

 			<h> MODEST LIVING </h>

  To deny ourselves, while everyone around us is getting as much as they
can as fast as they can, is a miserable sounding gospel at the best of times,
yet Jesus still says, `If any man will follow Me, let him deny himself...'
  In her excellent book, Living on Less and Liking it More, Maxine Hancock
gives us a clue to solving this dilemma.
  `Living modestly, by choice, means living somewhere below that level that
could be maintained if all of your income were administered for the family's
needs and wants. Years ago, when deep freezers came into the general public
market, I remember a discussion in our home about purchasing one. With a
growing family to feed, my frugal mother could see the obvious economic
advantages of owning a home deep freeze. Mother and Dad discussed the deep
freeze two or three times. Each time, the discussion died away and did not
resurface for several months.
  `Finally, a family-sized deep freeze was bought. I just assumed my parents
had purchased the freezer as soon as they could afford it. Because they
were people who did not let their right hand know what their left hand was
doing, I didn't stumble upon the truth until much later in a conversation
with my mother.
  ``Why didn't you get it earlier?' I pressed.
  `My mother shrugged. `Because several times when we had the money laid
aside for the freezer, the Lord brought to our attention someone who had
a greater need.'
  `That's restraint. And it results in modest living. Modest living is refusing
to be coerced by T.V. and other adver+tising, into feeling that everything
five years or older is obsolete and in need of replacing.
  `But it does not necessarily mean living in a deprived state. It simply
means that income entrusted to a family is to be administered for the glory
of God. And that will require restraint in personal spending. Modest living
demands a strong sense of realism, something often dulled by easy credit
and high pressure advertising. It means living within our limited budgets
whether they are limited of necessity or by choice.'
  Something within me was excited by this concept.
  In our society it is hard enough for us to go without the things we can't
have, let alone the things we can have.
  Around this time I lost my purse with $100 in it and experienced the usual
anger and sense of frustration. As the days went by and it wasn't returned,
I decided I would use it as an opportunity to learn something, rather than
waste negative energy being upset. I saw that we were surviving quite well
anyway; our needs were still being met. So I let it go and left it with
the Lord. I reasoned that if we had survived so well when I lost $100, maybe
I could give more away and `survive' a great deal better than I might have
imagined.
  I am not a stranger to giving by any means. I was taught as a child to
tithe my pocket money. As a wage earner I continued this giving and in our
marriage we tithe and give offerings to the Lord's work. We are raising
three boys on a moderate wage, and I don't work, so it is not always easy
to give. But we know it is God's plan and way to blessing.

			<h> USE WHAT YOU HAVE </h>

  But here God was challenging me to a little more personal giving. I always
treated my housekeeping with care to meet the needs of my family. However,
I began to look around for ways I could give small amounts of money by limiting
my buying to food, petrol and clothing the children needed - and I mean,
needed.

</subsample>

</sample>



<sample><id> D15 </id>

<source> Daily Bread </source>

<note> 2005 words </note>

<subsample><id> D15a </id>

<source> Daily Bread - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> KINGDOM ACTION! </h>

 <h> Luke chapters 17 and 18 </h>

1. We are to be careful about the example we set for younger Christians
(17:3) and we should always seek to enlarge our faith (17:5). Suggest ways
in which we might do both.
2. Some will find this exercise easier than others, but it is worth making
the effort. In an attitude of stillness and silence, have one member slowly
read verses 12 to 19 of chapter 17 aloud while the rest of the group try
to imagine themselves as the leper who returned to say 'thank you'. Take
time over it. Imagine the scenery, the people, the heat, the dust. Try to
see Jesus in action, and hear his voice. After a time of quiet reflection
share your experiences - what did you want to say to Jesus?
3. Where is the Kingdom of God (17:21)? Look up these passages and make
a list of other things you discover about it:

	   <misc> list of references omitted </misc>

4. Bearing in mind what we learnt in point 1 above, we must guard against
pride in our 'goodness' (18:9-14). What really constitutes humility? Does
this mean that in the church we should not give credit for tasks well done?
5. Being a citizen of the Kingdom of God can be demanding, as the young
ruler discovered (18:18-30), but well worth the cost. The rich man went
away 'very sad'. What is promised to those who enter (18:30)? What does
that mean for you in the here-and-now?
6. Notice the blind man's insistence on calling out to Jesus(18:38,39).
His need was urgent as Jesus was 'passing by'. Are we too casual about bringing
our needs to Jesus?

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D15b </id>

<source> Daily Bread - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS </h>

`Leviticus?' That's one book of the Bible I can do without! All rules and
regulations, sacrifices and seriousness. What do we want to read that for?'
Is that your reaction to this book? Then here's another question for you:
Why would we not want to learn more about the meaning underlying Jesus'
death for us?
The Israelites of the Old Testament were God's chosen people, just as the
Church is today (1 Peter 2:9) - and they were chosen for the same purpose:
to show and make known the wonderful works of God. Further, just as the
Church has the Lord Jesus Christ in her midst (is, in fact, the body of
Christ), so the Israelites had Almighty God, signified by the Tabernacle,
in their midst. But God is holy. Since holiness cannot co-exist with
uncleanness, how can God remain in the centre of a sinful and profane people
without destroying them?
This question is equally important for long-ago Israelites and for Christians
today. A study of Leviticus will help our understanding of the answer.
Throughout the book you will recognise parallels and contrasts with various
aspects of our Lord's ministry and death. Why not keep a record of all you
find? It will be very helpful when we go on to study Hebrews and the later
chapters of Luke's gospel.
And now, open your Bible and join us in our quest for understanding of these
strange practices.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D15c </id>

<source> Daily Bread - July-September </source>

<h> Thursday August 7 </h>

<h> THE PERSISTENT PROBLEM OF GUILT </h>

<h> PRAY </h>
Lord Jesus, challenge my assumptions and let me see new things in
       your word today.

<h> READ </h>
Leviticus 5:14 - 6:7.

<h> THINK </h>
Imagine three Israelites in Moses' day. One knows he cheated someone.
Another rashly made a promise but did not fulfil it. A third feels out of
fellowship with God, but cannot remember disobeying him. What should each
one do? How can their broken fellowship be restored?
  In each case, the Law says: Bring a ram as a guilt (compensation) offering
to the Lord. In the first two instances the worshipper must make restitution
with interest.
  This ram offering teaches two important lessons. First, it takes seriously
the uneasy conscience that cannot find specific cause for its restlessness,
and provides a means by which the worshippers may know that atonement has
been made. What does Hebrews 9:14 suggest as the way to deal with an uneasy
conscience?

Thank God today that Jesus' blood cleanses from ALL sin - not just conscious
sin.
  Second, it underlines the fact that sin has both a social and a spiritual
dimension. Even defrauding a neighbour (6:2-5) is seen as "unfaithfulness
to the Lord". Before the worshippers may offer the ram and be declared
forgiven, they must put right the wrong done by giving compensation to the
wronged person.
  Jesus also taught (Matthew 5:23-24) that we should not come to God in
worship without first being reconciled with others.

<h> ACTION </h>
Is there anyone today to whom you should make restitution, or with
whom you need to be reconciled? Ask God for a humble spirit. Make a telephone
call, write a letter, or visit the person, to put things right.

<h> MEDITATE </h>
Focus on Jesus, the 'Suffering Servant' as our guilt offering (Isaiah
53:10).

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D15d </id>

<source> Daily Bread - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> Friday August 8 </h>

<h> AN UNDYING FLAME </h>

<h> PRAY </h>
Lord, may I see the light of your purity, the fire of your cleansing
       and the flame of your love ever before me.

<h> READ </h>
Leviticus 6:8-13.

<h> THINK </h>
The first and last thing an Israelite would have seen each day was
the smoke of the burnt offering rising from the court of the Tabernacle.
  Why do you think the fire was kept constantly burning (12,13)?

  Because people constantly sin, God made provision for their continual
need for atonement in the burnt offering always burning on the altar. The
flame and the smoke would serve as an ever-present reminder of both their
need and God's provision of a way of forgiveness.
  We have no column of smoke to remind us. But we do have the undying flame
of his love which sent Jesus to die once for ever for our sins. And 'he
always lives to intercede for us' (Hebrews 7:25, NIV).

<h> NOTE </h>
The quarantine-like precautions in verses 10 and 11. In fact, that
is exactly what they are. Why?
  God is holy, and anything consecrated for his service (including any part
of the sacrifice - even the ashes) becomes holy. Holiness cannot co-exist
with uncleanness, so if any uncleanness comes in contact with anything holy
judgement falls. The priest may not wear his holy uniform outside the camp
(where it is unclean) lest he bring judgement upon himself and the people.
Furthermore, the holy ashes must not be dumped just anywhere outside the
camp; they have to be taken to a clean place (11).
  Jesus too was concerned about the contamination of sin.
  What did he see was the way for his followers to be kept holy (John
17:14-19)?

<h> PRAISE </h>
Thank God that at any time you may confess your sin and be freely
forgiven for Jesus' sake. Thank him too for Jesus' continuing intercession
for us.

<h> PRAY </h>
Pray for your pastor*paster. Like the priest of Israel, he needs to remember
people's basic need - forgiveness.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D15e </id>

<source> Daily Bread - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> Saturday August 9 </h>

<h> GIVING AND RECEIVING </h>

<h> PRAY </h>
Thank you, my loving Parent, for all that you have given me. Today
       I specially want to thank you for ...

<h> READ </h>
Leviticus 6:14-23.

<h> THINK </h>
Submission to God.  Under Moses' leadership, the Israelites had made a
covenant, or treaty, with the Lord (Exodus 19:3-8). He agreed to be their
God while they promised wholehearted loyalty and obedience to him.
  Treaties between conquerors and their subjects were well-known to the
Israelites. As a mark of loyalty, the conquered people were required to
send a regular tribute gift to their overlord. Now, as the Israelites learnt
what it meant to be the Lord's loyal subjects, they were taught how to bring
their 'tribute gift' (for this seems to have been the nature of the cereal
offering).
  Provision from God.  In bringing this gift, the people were acknowledging
their utter and grateful dependence on the Lord and his gifts to them. As
well, they were providing for the needs of their spiritual leaders, for
the cereal offering formed the staple diet of the priests (16,17).
  The ordinance of this offering was intended to teach about giving and
receiving.
  When the worshippers took their cereal offering to the priests, to whom
were they giving it (2:1)?

From whom did the priests receive their portion (17)?

<h> FOCUS </h>
God still provides for those who serve him, but the responsibility
for giving is ours. Prayerfully consider your own giving.
- How is it determined? By the church's budget, your own financial situation,
or what?
- Does it include God's concern for the whole world?
- Is it limited to physical needs or alternatively to 'spiritual'*'spirtual'
ministries?
- Is it dutiful, joyful, grudging*gruding, enthusiastic?
- Is it a subject of frequent prayer?

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D15f </id>

<source> Daily Bread - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> Sunday August 10 </h>

<h> LOOK AND SEE - GOD CARES! </h>

<h> PRAY </h>
Lord, help me to find your will today, and then enable me to do it.

<h> READ </h>
Psalm 33:12-22.

<h> THINK </h>
Psalm 33 speaks to us about the effectiveness of the word of God to 
express and carry out his divine will. Today's reading is particularly*particulary
concerned with his word in judgement.
  Blessed are the people whom God has chosen as his heritage (12). Christians
are told that they are blessed and know that this is true, but sometimes
have trouble in believing it! Really, this is not surprising, since we should
not expect to live trouble-free lives during this existence on earth. However,
it's often hard to believe that we are blessed in the midst of suffering
and frustration. In the parable of the Prodigal Son, the older brother feels
bitter and sees little cause for gratitude, yet his blessings shown by the
reply of his father are many - 'Son, you are always with me, and all that
is mine is yours.' (Luke 15:31). Our blessing is always there, but it does
not always consist of the tangible and material rewards by which we measure
our lives.
  The Lord looks down (13). This verse which pictures God in a rather classical
way, should give us reassurance and hope because God's concern demonstrates
his love and care.
  The war horse is a vain hope (17). Another illustration of the splendid
might of the war horse can be found in Job 39:19-25. Splendid though it
is, its power is unable to save.

<h> FOCUS </h>
How is God involved in human history (10-19)?

<h> MEDITATE </h>
I lift my eyes to the hills
          From whence does my help come?
          My help comes from the Lord
          who made heaven and earth.   Psalm 121:1,2.

<h> PRAY </h>
Dear Lord, help us to look at you, not our problems; to trust in you,
the Blesser and not in our blessings.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> D15g </id>

<source> Daily Bread - July-September 1986 </source>

<h> Monday August 11 </h>

<h> HOLY, HOLY, HOLY </h>

<h> PRAY </h>
Almighty God, show me what it means to be holy as you are holy.

<h> READ </h>
Leviticus 6:24-30.

<h> THINK </h>
How do you understand the word 'holy'?

  What is described as 'holy' or 'most holy' in verses 25-27 and 29? How
does this fit with your definition of 'holy'?

  The basic statement about holiness in Leviticus is the reiterated claim
by God, 'I am holy' (for example 20:26). In fact, the motto of Leviticus
could well be 'You shall be holy for I am holy' (for example 11:45). Holiness
is primarily related to the character and being of God - his 'otherness'
or 'separateness'. Thus people or things become holy when they are separated
for and dedicated to God. And uncleanness therefore has nothing to do with
dirt or germs; rather it is unlikeness to God.
  The command in verses 27 and 28 must be seen in the light of this
understanding of holiness. Because of the holy blood on the priest's clothes
or on the cooking pot, these articles become holy and must be separated
from common use. So the garment and the pot must be washed carefully (or
destroyed in the case of a clay pot which could not be thoroughly scoured)
to prevent contact between these holy things and anything unclean.
  To us these prescriptions may seem strange. Yet the underlying principle
remains as true today as in Moses' time: the holy God cannot co-exist with
the unclean.
                        
</subsample>

</sample>



<sample><id> D16 </id>

<source> Acts Tracts </source>

<note> 2006 words </note>

<subsample><id> D16a </id>

<source> Acts Tracts - 1986 </source>
  
 <h> How to be filled with God's spirit </h>

 <bl> by Dick Innes </bl>

How could one person possibly fill Madison Square Gardens with 20,000 people
every night for four months? `Impossible,' thought a lovely Broadway actress,
and the only reason she attended Billy Graham's New York Crusade was to
find out how he did it.
  This actress had a long-standing illness that she described as `a terrible
cavity somewhere in the abdominal region'. Fearing she had some dreaded disease,
she had been examined by several doctors and had insisted on exploratory
surgery. Not one doctor could find anything physically wrong with her.
  But that night, as she sat listening to Billy Graham and trying to be
as inconspicuous as possible, without warning she was gripped with this
dreaded `emptiness' more severely than ever.
  Suddenly she realized that its cause wasn't physical at all. It was
spiritual. So she responded to the invitation to receive Jesus Christ into
her heart as personal Lord and Saviour - and her overwhelming emptiness
vanished, never to return.
  Not all emptiness has a spiritual cause by any means, but much of the
emptiness which plagues modern society does.
  People are not only physical and emotional beings with a need for food
and friends, but they are also spiritual beings with a need for God.
  Without Christ in our lives we are spiritually dead, but when we receive
him as personal Lord and Saviour, we become spiritually alive (2 Corinthians
5:17), are immediately indwelt by God's Holy Spirit, and so belong to the
body of all true Christians. As the Apostle Paul said, `For we were all
baptized (immersed) by one Spirit into one body...and are all given the
one Spirit' (1 Corinthians 12:13).
  Every true Christian, therefore, has God's Spirit within. But God doesn't
only want us to be merely indwelt by, but filled with his Spirit. His
injunction is to `go on being filled with the Spirit' (Ephesians 5:18, literal
translation), which is a continuous, daily experience.
  When we are filled with God's Spirit, he fills the spiritual vacuum in
our life and gives us God's power:to help us overcome temptation and sin
(Romans 8:12); to produce in us the fruit of the Spirit, which is love,
joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and
self-control (Galatians 5:22,23); and to make us effective witnesses for
Jesus Christ (Acts 1:8).
  How, then, can we be filled with the Holy Spirit?
  First, desire and faith. As with all of God's gifts, so is the filling
of the Holy Spirit. We need to truly want it and we need to believe that
God will give it to us as he said he would.
  Jesus said, `If any one thirsts (that is, strongly desires), let him come
to me and drink. He who believes in me, as the Scripture said, "Out of his
innermost being shall flow rivers of living water." By this he spoke of
the Spirit, whom those who believe in him were to receive' (John 7:37-39).
  Second, commitment. If my heart is filled with anxiety, anxiety will control
my life. But if my heart is filled with God's Spirit, his love, joy and
peace will control my life.
  What our heart and mind are filled with is what controls us. And what
we are filled with is what we are committed to. If we are committed to
ourselves, we will be controlled by our selfish desires plus our anxieties,
fears, and so on. But if we are committed to Christ, and make him Lord of
our everyday lives, we will be controlled by his Spirit plus the fruits
of the Spirit.
  Third, openness. In a very real sense, the issue isn't how much of the
Holy Spirit I have, but how much of me does the Holy Spirit have? As we
have said, when we receive Christ as Lord and Saviour, we are given the
Holy Spirit in all his fullness. The difficulty is that most of us don't
know how to open ourselves to the fullness or filling of the Holy Spirit.
  For instance, if I am a closed, defensive person, or have any areas of
my life that are repressed - areas of my inner self out of which I have
shut both myself and others - I automatically shut God and his Spirit out
too. Therefore, to be fully filled with God's Spirit, I need to learn to
be fully open about my secret thoughts, feelings and motives - to myself,
to at least one other person and to God.
  Fourth, personal honesty. The Holy Spirit is also known as the Spirit
of Truth. Thus, to be filled with the Spirit of Truth, we need to be truthful
with ourselves and with God. If we have committed our life to Jesus and
dedicated our heart and mind to his control but still don't have his love,
joy, and peace, it isn't because God or his Spirit have left us. It is often
because of barriers in us that block the flow of God's Spirit.
  These barriers are often unresolved feelings of fear, inadequacy, false
or real guilt, hurt, resentment, and so on which we have either consciously
or unconsciously hidden or repressed. These are the pains that keep us focussed
on ourself, which in turn block out God's Spirit. Therefore, if I don't
have as much of God's love, joy and peace as I'd like to have, I need to
admit this and be truthful and courageous about facing and resolving my
inner negative feelings.
  Fifth, removing barriers. Those barriers that block God's Spirit usually
have their roots in an impaired relationship or a hurtful experience from
our past. To experience God's love, joy and peace, it is necessary that
impaired relationships be put right and any unresolved feelings of hurt,
anger or resentment dealt with fully and confessed to either a trusted friend,
minister or counsellor, as James advises (James 5:16), or to a specific
person if he or she is involved (Matthew 5:23,24), and always to God, who
has promised to forgive us (1 John 1:9).
  Sixth, obedience. Another requirement for the filling of the Holy Spirit
is living in harmony with, and obedience to, the Word and will of God. As
Peter said, the Holy Spirit is given to those who obey God (Acts 5:32).
  Finally, abiding. Jesus said, `I am the vine, you are the branches. He
who abides in me and I in him will bear much fruit; for apart from me you
can do nothing' (John 15:5).
  Christ's allegory is a good illustration of how to have a fruitful life.
As we, the branches, abide in Christ the vine by spending time with him
(daily studying his Word, praying, and living in obedience to him), so the
sap, or Holy Spirit, flows from Christ through us the branches, and fruit
is the natural outcome.
  The good news is that we don't have to struggle to produce God's fruit. 
We can't anyhow, and if we try to the fruit is unreal. That's what Christ
meant when he said without him we can do nothing. Only his Spirit within
can produce his fruit without.
  As we commit our lives in full surrender to Jesus Christ, abide in him,
and resolve the barriers, his Spirit, already dwelling in every Christian,
fills us and his fruits of love, joy and peace come automatically.
                  
</subsample>

<subsample><id> D16b </id>

<source> Acts Tracts  - 1986 </source>

<h> When You've Had a Bad Day </h>

<bl> by Dick Innes </bl>

Walter Elias froze with fascination.
  A sensitive child, Walter had grown up in the city until he was five years
old, when his family moved to a farm. One day, two years later, Walter was
walking through an apple orchard when he discovered, to his amazement, an
owl perched on a low branch.
  Remembering that his father had told him that owls hunted at night but
slept during the day, Walter crept quietly towards the sleeping bird.
  `What a wonderful pet this funny creature would make,' he thought to himself.
So, sneaking right up behind it, he stealthily reached up and seized it
by the legs.
  Whew! What a shock both were in for. Terrified, the owl went berzerk.
Flapping wings frantically, screeching loudly, and struggling furiously,
it did everything in its power to escape.
  Equally terrified, Walter panicked. He clung to the bird for dear life.
In utter terror, he eventually threw it to the ground and stamped it to
death. When the struggle ended and the pounding of his heart subsided
some+what, Walter looked down at the broken and bloodied bird ... and cried.
  Feeling terrible, he ran from the orchard, but later returned to bury
the owl. For months he dreamed of this bird he had wanted for a pet but
in terror had killed.
  Too ashamed to tell anyone, he kept his secret to himself. Only years
later did he share it.
  Perhaps it was this grief more than anything else that helped make Walter
the person he became. Never could he bring that owl back to life, but he
made all the animals of the forest come alive through his drawings and the
wonderful entertainment centre named after himself.
  His full name? Walter Elias Disney.
  Have you ever failed or felt as if you had? Ever done something that you
later felt terrible about? Or experienced a business or personal setback
that gave your self-concept a beating? Or gone through a relationship breakdown
that left you feeling less than whole? Or perhaps experienced some physical
hardship, handicap, sickness or a mental breakdown that devastated you?
  If so, welcome to the human race. When we fail or feel as though we have
failed, we tend to think we are the odd person out. It isn't so. Everyone
of us has failed at something. We have all done things we are sorry for.
We have all faced setbacks at some time or another and felt as if we were
going under. I certainly have.
  It can be very easy to `preach' from an ivory tower or be an armchair
theorist and give out simplistic solutions to life's everyday struggles
if you've never failed, suffered, or been heartbroken, lonely, sick, or
over+whelmed with discouragement.
  But for what it might be worth, if*it you are in need of encouragement
today, I want you to know that I have, in part at least, sat where you sit.
  My home began to fall apart when I was a young teenager. Eventually my
parents divorced. In those days divorce simply was not accepted as readily
as it is today and I felt terribly ashamed. I felt very much rejected by
my father and ended up rejecting him, which left me feeling very insecure.
  And when it comes to doing wrong, I've committed enough sins to know that
I am less than perfect. I've known what it is to struggle in business and
verge on going under. I've also felt at times like leaving my wife, as she
has me. And I've known years of family sickness and disaster too.
  I can't say that I like trouble. Neither am I a good sufferer. But this
one thing I know: you and I can rise above our failures, misfortunes or
circumstances.
  Walt Disney turned his childhood nightmare into a beautiful dream, which
in turn became a reality. You and I can do the same, too, if we want to
badly enough and will persevere.
  Not that it comes easily. It rarely does. It didn't for Walt Disney either.
Apparently he went broke seven times and had a nervous breakdown before
he realized his dreams and became successful.
  Here's how you, too, can be successful:
  First, accept yourself as human. Realize that it's all right to fall or
to fail. It's all part of the human experience. You don't have to be perfect
to be a worthwhile person. You just need to be you.
  Second, when you fall don't stay down. Recognize that the only real failure
is not to get up once more than you've either fallen or been knocked down.
       
</subsample>

</sample>


<sample><id> D17 </id>

<source> The Promise of World Peace. A Statement by The Universal House of Justice </source>

<note> 2028 words </note>

<h> The promise of world peace </h>

		                <h> I </h>

The endowments which distinguish the human race from all other forms of
life are summed up in what is known as the human spirit; the mind is its
essential quality. These endowments have enabled humanity to build
civilizations and to prosper materially. But such accomplishments alone
have never satisfied the human spirit, whose mysterious nature inclines
it towards transcendence, a reaching towards an invisi+ble realm, towards
the ultimate reality, that unknow+able essence of essences called God. The
religions brought to mankind by a succession of spiritual lu+minaries have
been the primary link between human+ity and that ultimate reality, and have
galvanized and refined mankind's capacity to achieve spiritual suc+cess
together with social progress.
  No serious attempt to set human affairs aright, to achieve world peace,
can ignore religion. Man's perception and practice of it are largely the
stuff of history. An eminent historian described religion as a "faculty
of human nature." That the perversion of this faculty has contributed to
much of the confusion in society and the conflicts in and between individu+als
can hardly be denied. But neither can any fair-minded observer discount
the preponderating influ+ence exerted by religion on the vital expressions
of civilization. Furthermore, its indispensability to so+cial order has
repeatedly been demonstrated by its direct effect on laws and morality.
  Writing of religion as a social force, Baha'u'llah said: "Religion is
the greatest of all means for the establishment of order in the world and
for the peace+ful contentment of all that dwell therein." Referring to the
eclipse or corruption of religion, he wrote: "Should the lamp of religion
be obscured, chaos and confusion will ensue, and the lights of fairness,
of justice, of tranquillity and peace cease to shine." In an enumeration
of such consequences the Baha'i writings point out that the "perversion
of human nature, the degradation of human conduct, the cor+ruption and
dissolution of human institutions, reveal themselves, under such circumstances,
in their worst and most revolting aspects. Human character is de+based,
confidence is shaken, the nerves of discipline are relaxed, the voice of
human conscience is stilled, the sense of decency and shame is obscured,
concep+tions of duty, of solidarity, of reciprocity and loyalty are distorted,
and the very feeling of peacefuless, of joy and of hope is gradually
extinguished."
  If, therefore, humanity has come to a point of paralyzing conflict it
must look to itself, to its own negligence, to the siren voices to which
it has listened, for the source of the misunderstandings and confu+sion
perpetrated in the name of religion. Those who have held blindly and selfishly
to their particular orthodoxies, who have imposed on their votaries er+roneous
and conflicting interpretations of the pro+nouncements of the Prophets of
God, bear heavy responsibility for this confusion - a confusion com+pounded
by the artificial barriers erected between faith and reason, science and
religion. For from a fair-minded examination of the actual utterances of
the Founders of the great religions, and of the social milieus in which
they were obliged to carry out their missions, there is nothing to support
the contentions and prejudices deranging the religious communities of mankind
and therefore all human affairs.
  The teaching that we should treat others as we ourselves would wish to
be treated, an ethic var+iously repeated in all the great religions, lends
force to this latter observation in two particular respects: it sums up
the moral attitude, the peace-inducing aspect, extending through these
religions irrespective of their place or time of origin; it also signifies
an aspect of unity which is their essential virtue, a vir+tue mankind in
its disjointed view of history has failed to appreciate.
  Had humanity seen the Educators of its collec+tive childhood in their
true character, as agents of one civilizing process, it would no doubt have
reaped incalculably greater benefits from the cumulative ef+fects of their
successive missions. This, alas, it failed to do.
  The resurgence of fanatical religious fervor occurring in many lands cannot
be regarded as more than a dying convulsion. The very nature of the violent
and disruptive phenomena associated with it testifies to the spiritual
bankruptcy it represents. In+deed, one of the strangest and saddest features
of the current outbreak of religious fanaticism is the extent to which,
in each case, it is undermining not only the spiritual values which are
conducive to the unity of mankind but also those unique moral victories
won by the particular religion it purports to serve.
  However vital a force religion has been in the history of mankind, and
however dramatic the cur+rent resurgence of militant religious fanaticism,
reli+gion and religious institutions have, for many dec+ades, been viewed
by increasing numbers of people as irrelevant to the major concerns of the
modern world. In its place they have turned either to the hedonistic pursuit
of material satisfactions or to the following of man-made ideologies designed
to rescue society from the evident evils under which it groans. All too
many of these ideologies, alas, instead of embracing the concept of the
oneness of mankind and promoting the increase of concord among differ+ent
peoples, have tended to deify the state, to subor+dinate the rest of mankind
to one nation, race or class, to attempt to suppress all discussion and
inter+change of ideas, or to callously abandon starving millions to the
operations of the market system that all too clearly is aggravating the
plight of the majority of mankind, while enabling small sections to live
in a condition of affluence scarcely dreamed of by our forebears.
  How tragic is the record of the substitute faiths that the worldly-wise
of our age have created. In the massive disillusionment of entire populations
who have been taught to worship at their altars can be read history's
irreversible verdict on their value. The fruits these doctrines have produced,
after decades of an increasingly unrestrained exercise of power by those
who owe their ascendancy in human affairs to them, are the social and economic
ills that blight every region of our world in the closing years of the
twentieth century. Underlying all these outward af+flictions is the spiritual
damage reflected in the apa+thy that has gripped the mass of the peoples
of all nations and by the extinction of hope in the hearts of deprived and
anguished millions.
  The time has come when those who preach the dogmas of materialism, whether
of the east or the west, whether of capitalism or socialism, must give account
of the moral stewardship they have pre+sumed to exercise. Where is the "new
world" prom+ised by these ideologies? Where is the international peace to
whose ideals they proclaim their devotion? Where are the breakthroughs into
new realms of cultural achievement produced by the aggrandize+ment of this
race, of that nation or of a particular class? Why is the vast majority
of the world's peoples sinking ever deeper into hunger and wretchedness
when wealth on a scale undreamed of by the Phar+aohs, the Caesars, or even
the imperialist powers of the nineteenth century is at the disposal of the
pres+ent arbiters of human affairs?
  Most particularly, it is in the glorification of material pursuits, at
once the progenitor and com+mon feature of all such ideologies, that we find
the roots which nourish the falsehood that human beings are incorrigibly
selfish and aggressive. It is here that the ground must be cleared for the
building of a new world fit for our descendants.
  That materialistic ideals have, in the light of experience, failed to
satisfy the needs of mankind calls for an honest acknowledgment
that a fresh effort must now be made to find the solutions to the agoniz+ing
problems of the planet. The intolerable condi+tions pervading society bespeak
a common failure of all, a circumstance which tends to incite rather than
relieve the entrenchment on every side. Clearly, a common remedial effort
is urgently required. It is primarily a matter of attitude. Will humanity
contin+ue in its waywardness, holding to outworn concepts and unworkable
assumptions? Or will its leaders, regardless of ideology, step forth and,
with a resolute will, consult together in a united search for appropri+ate
solutions?
  Those who care for the future of the human race may well ponder this advice.
"If long-cherished ideals and time-honored institutions, if certain social
assumptions and religious formulae have ceased to promote the welfare of
the generality of mankind, if they no longer minister to the needs of a
continually evolving humanity, let them be swept away and rele+gated to
the limbo of obsolescent and forgotten doc+trines. Why should these, in
a world subject to the immutable law of change and decay, be exempt from
the deterioration that must needs overtake every hu+man institution? For
legal standards, political and economic theories are solely designed to
safeguard the interests of humanity as a whole, and not human+ity to be
crucified for the preservation of the integrity of any particular law or
doctrine."

			        <h> II </h>

Banning nuclear weapons, prohibiting the use of poi+son gases, or outlawing
germ warfare will not remove the root causes of war. However important such
prac+tical measures obviously are as elements of the peace process, they
are in themselves too superficial to exert enduring influence. Peoples are
ingenious enough to invent yet other forms of warfare, and to use food,
raw materials, finance, industrial power, ideology, and terrorism to subvert
one another in an endless quest for supremacy and dominion. Nor can the
present massive dislocation in the affairs of humanity be resolved through
the settlement of specific con+flicts or disagreements among nations. A
genuine universal framework must be adopted.
  Certainly, there is no lack of recognition by national leaders of the
worldwide character of the problem, which is self-evident in the mounting
issues that confront them daily. And there are the accumu+lating studies
and solutions proposed by many con+cerned and enlightened groups as well
as by agencies of the United Nations, to remove any possibility of ignorance
as to the challenging requirements to be met. There is, however, a paralysis
of will; and it is this that must be carefully examined and resolutely dealt
with. This paralysis is rooted, as we have stated, in a deep-seated conviction
of the inevitable quarrel+someness of mankind, which has led to the reluctance
to entertain the possibility of subordinating national self-interest to
the requirements of world order, and in an unwillingness to face courageously
the far-reaching implications of establishing a united world authority.
It is also traceable to the incapacity of largely ignorant and subjugated
masses to articulate their desire for a new order in which they can live
in peace, harmony and prosperity with all humanity.
  The tentative steps towards world order, espe+cially since World War II,
give hopeful signs. The increasing tendency of groups of nations to formalize
relationships which enable them to cooperate in mat+ters of mutual interest
suggests that eventually all nations could overcome this paralysis. The
Associa+tion of South East Asian Nations, the Caribbean Community and Common
Market, the Central American Common Market, the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance, the European Communities, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Afri+can Unity, the Organization of American States, the
South Pacific Forum - all the joint endeavors repre+sented by such
organizations prepare the path to world order.
  The increasing attention being focused on some of the most deep-rooted
problems of the planet is yet another hopeful sign. Despite the obvious
short+comings of the United Nations, the more than two score declarations
and conventions adopted by that organization, even where governments have
not been enthusiastic in their commitment, have given ordi+nary people a
sense of a new lease on life. The Uni+versal Declaration of Human Rights,
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and the similar measures concerned with eliminating all forms of discrimination
based on race, sex or religious belief; upholding the rights of the child;
protecting all persons against being subjected to torture; eradicating hunger
and malnutrition; us+ing scientific and technological progress in the inter+est
of peace and the benefit of mankind - all such measures, if courageously
enforced and expanded, will advance the day when the specter of war will
have lost its power to dominate international rela+tions.


</sample>

</section>








