<subsample>
	<id> B03h</id>
	


	<source>Daily Mirror - 27 June 1986</source>
	


	<h> ARMISTICE BEFORE THE SUPER WAR</h>
	

IF the national wage case decision is an attempt to reach some form of
armistice between business, the unions and the Federal Government it is
a unique achievement.
  In fact it must be the only armistice ever signed BEFORE a war rather
than at the END of it.
  The Arbitration Commission sought to satisfy all three parties. And it
failed abysmally. Its decision:
  ENSURES the continuation of a system under which those who earn more get
more, those who earn less get less, and those who earn nothing do without;
  GUARANTEES another rise in the CPI;
  HANDS a large part of the 2.3 percent pay rise to the tax man;
  FAILS to do anything to improve our competitive position; 
  MOCKS any claims the unions or the A.L.P. might make to be concerned about
social justice or creating jobs; and
  ABDICATES responsibility for stopping claims for superannuation schemes
based on productivity, although it is obvious the economy cannot afford
them.

Knee-cap clause
  By promising to rubber-stamp superannuation agreements the commission
has given the unions carte blanche to force schemes through whether the
economy can afford them or not.                                      
  It is, in effect, a knee-cap clause - a pay-up or else opportunity for
the bullies of the union movement to see themselves right at the expense
of others.
  There is a slender chance the Federal Government may be able to slow down
the super rush by threatening to delay the tax cuts promised for September.
The success of such a move is even now debatable.

Few key cards
  Nevertheless the cuts represent one of the few key cards the Government
can play in an economy in which progress is largely dictated by the unions
with little regard for the future. 
  Most Australians accept the need for reduced standards of living in a world 
of falling commodity prices where our competitors have lower costs and 
inflation and interest rates.
  To make sacrifices to get somewhere in the future is worthwhile.
  But to make sacrifices and see the gains dissipated by union
bloody-mindedness before the country can benefit from them would be a complete
tragedy.                               


</subsample>
