Boom times for our steel industry 

But industrial action threatens one of the world's few profitable operations
From FIA CUMMING in Canberra
  IT HAS become a cliche to talk about "the ailing steel industry". In fact
the steel industry is doing very nicely, thank you.
  BHP's steel division is no longer the sore spot of its corporate empire.
  It is running close to full capacity, selling strongly not only here,
but overseas.
  Where three years ago it was threatened with closure, it is now one of
the world's few profitable steel operations. And where the axe once swung
over thousands of jobs, employment is actually increasing.
  Sadly, better times are now being threatened by a rising number of strikes
and industrial disputes.
  The number of man hours lost through disputes in March was the highest
since the Federal Government's steel industry plan began in early 1984.

MONITORING
SITUATION
  Port Kembla workers are now on strike over bonuses in a dispute that began
several months ago, spoiling the record further.
  The Steel Industry Authority, representing unions, employers and the Federal
government, is worried about the industrial problems and will be closely
monitoring the situation over the next few months.
  But in other areas, the authority has every reason to be pleased with
the turnaround achieved since the plan was introduced. 
  The latest report from the authority, issued this week, shows that more
than 90 per cent of Australia's steel making capacity is used.
  Raw steel production by BHP during the March quarter was 1.57 million
tonnes, up almost 10 per cent on the 1985 March quarter.
  On an annual basis, that means  steel output is up by more than a seventh
on 1983.
  In January, Port Kembla recorded its highest monthly production since
the plan began.
  Locally-produced steel is also competing well with imported steel. Imports
have fallen markedly and in the March quarter were 10 per cent less than
the previous quarter and 23 per cent less than the March 1985 quarter.
  The local industry's market share has risen to 91 per cent, showing that
our steel is now more competitive.
  The devaluation of the Australian dollar has certainly helped the steel
industry, as imports have become more expensive.
  But the authority "believes that improvements in operational efficiency
and marketing by the company have also contributed to the improved position."
  Exports are doing better for the same reasons. In Australian dollar terms,
steel exports rose by 48 per cent in the nine months to February, 1986,
compared with the same period in 1985.
  One of the aims of the steel plan was to reduce employment, with greater
investment in capital.
  Since January 1984, more than 1700 jobs have been shed. But in the March
quarter net employment increased by 1.1 per cent, the biggest increase in
more than two years.
  Meanwhile, productivity has jumped from 175 tonnes per man to about 285
tonnes and will rise to nearly 300 tonnes next year when a new steel making
process is introduced.
  At Newcastle however, which has the highest productivity, the output
is already 300 tonnes per man.
  With such good results, BHP has found it worthwhile to invest heavily
in steel.
  At the start of the plan, it agreed to spend $800 million over five years,
but the total will now be $950 million.
  Much of this will go on the new continuous slab-casting method for raw
steel.
  Against this is the niggling worry of industrial unrest. Although they
are nowhere near the levels before the plan, disputes seem to be growing
more serious.

SERIOUS
DISPUTES
  In 1981, more than 70,000 man hours were lost in an average month. By
last year, this had been slashed to just 8500 man hours. But the first three
months of this year showed a sharp rise.
  In March, the number of hours lost was more than 20,000 and the continuing
strike at Port Kembla promises more bad figures.
  Both the authority and the Industry, Technology and Commerce Minister,
Senator Button, are disappointed at the strike level. They want to know
why it is happening and will attempt to stop the rot setting in.
  When Robert Holmes a Court made his bid for BHP, there were fears he would
close down the steel division.
  NSW Labor Council secretary, John MacBean, spoke for many when he said:
"I don't believe Holmes a Court would maintain the steel division at its
current capacity or in its present form.
  "It is not the most profitable section. He is looking at gas and oil and
not at the labor-intensive steel division, even though its  productivity
is as good as any other steel industry in the world."
  But last year, the steel division made $164.5 million profit and this
year is expected to make more than $200 million.
  Despite good intentions, Mr MacBean may be selling the steel industry
short.
  
