`Rambo' fights back for free enterpriseFrom Motoring Writer WAYNE WEBSTER in Munich 

AUSTRALIA'S embattled automotive industry will get a $20 million shot
in the arm thanks to an ambitious export program about to be undertaken
by BMW. 
  In a bid to salvage its almost decimated share of the Australian car
market, BMW Australia is desperately hoping to stitch together a lucrative
export deal with the German head office. 
  The managing director of BMW Australia, Mr Ron Meatchem, said here yesterday
that the vital export program was the only thing that stood between BMW
and "extinction" on the strife-torn Australian market.
  Mr Meatchem is planning to ship Australian components to Germany in a
bold bid to earn life-saving export credits to offset BMW's ballooning import
bill, which has skyrocketed because of the falling Aussie dollar.
  "We want to become an importer/exporter, a whole new role in the Australian
car industry," said Mr Meatchem.
  "In this way we can survive the holocaust of the past six months."
  Mr Meatchem, the outspoken head of BMW Australia, has recently been
nicknamed "Rambo" because of his verbal attacks on the Federal Government's
motor industry policies.  
  "Senator Button's motor industry plan has turned from a path for importers 
into a rocky path to destruction," he said.
  According to Mr Meatchem, over the next 18 months importers are going
to find it difficult to survive, battling not only the Government's
controversial Fringe Benefits Tax and sales tax increases on luxury cars,
but also the sick and sorry Aussie dollar.
  "Under the present Labor Government philosophy, we're completely
expendable," he said.
  "But we are an Australian company in Australia."
  BMW Australia's bold plan is to sell fully-finished car components back
to Germany in a bid to earn export credits and ease the terrible burden
of importing cars. 
  BMW Germany has already had a team in Australia looking at the local
suppliers, and at least 15 local companies will be approached to take part
in the scheme.
  Mr Meatchem hopes to send Australian glass, aluminium, electrical products
and suspension gear back to Germany in order to earn cost-cutting credits.
  "The Government is making it tough for us to survive in Australia," he
said.
  "In January, 1985, a BMW 735i cost $62,000, but by the end of this year
it will be almost double - and the government is taking almost 50 per cent
of that in tax.
  "If we don't have the free enterprise system, Australia is doomed as
a nation."

