<subsample>
	<id> B05g</id>
	


	<source>Daily Telegraph  - 16 October 1986</source>
	


	<h> No overtaking proposal, just not practical</h>
	

THE NSW Staysafe Committee has completely missed the mark with its latest
proposal to do battle with our rising road toll - they have tried to design an 
orange and ended up with a lemon.
  Its proposal to ban overtaking on all two-lane roads in NSW will go down
in history as one of the silliest pieces of bureaucratic nonsense ever to
grace the pages of a government report.
  Already the NRMA and the NSW Police Association have called the proposal
impractical and likely to be ignored by many if it ever becomes law.
  There is no denying that there are idiots on the road and that the casualty
rate from irresponsible overtaking is far too high.
  More Mayhem
  But to enshrine in law a system in which the only legal means of travelling
on the open road is to drive in Indian file is to invite even more mayhem
and the probability of increased driver frustration with its inevitable
results.
  Oppressive laws are never the answer to difficult situations.  Driver
education can be.
  The Staysafe Committee has done a commendable job in the past in highlighting
the dangers of and possible solutions to what has become one of the most
devastating problems of modern living.
  It has come up with several commendable proposals which have made real
improvements in the battle to keep the road toll down.
  But it has entered into the realms of the unrealistic when it suggests
a solution which is neither practical nor capable of being adequately policed.
  As Police Association president, Lloyd Taylor, pointed out it would need
at least another 200 police officers to enforce.
  It is not difficult to realise that the NSW force just does not have the
manpower to handle that situation.
  Police presence
  And the NRMA proposal to spend the money involved on more overtaking 
lanes is surely a far more reasonable proposal than that envisaged.
  On the other hand, the Staysafe Committee may have hit on a winner with
its suggestion that an increased police presence with giant electronic boards
showing motorists how fast they are travelling may help in cutting down
that other killer - speed.
  Any motorist knows the sobering effect the presence of a police car in
a stream of traffic can have.
  The committee should be reminded that as bad as the problem may be, it
calls for reasonable and practical solutions, not a cumbersome and unworkable
system which could only have the effect of adding to the difficulties road
users already face.                                           
                                                              

</subsample>
