Double standards 

SIR: I can longer support a government which finds it acceptable for me
to be required to carry an identification number in case I may be a tax
cheat, yet which also can find it acceptable that our Treasurer can be allowed
to claim more per year in living-away-from-home expenses than I bring home
each year in after-tax salary.
 
 Graham Howard,
Princes Street,
Boronia Park.  
September 21



 Policy fallout 

SIR: By breaking the ban on uranium sales to France, Australia virtually
gives tacit approval to the continuation of French testing in the Pacific
- the very reason the bans were imposed. The argument that France is obtaining
uranium elsewhere has no bearing on this.
  By flouting party platform and conference resolution, and so abandoning
traditional, ethically-based Labor policy, the Government is depriving the
public of a real choice between main parties at the next election.
  There is little point in having democratic elections if a party dishonours
its commitments to the electorate when it attains government and thereafter.
People don't elect politicians to use their discretion on major policy
matters as Bob Hawke has done, but to carry out those policies. 
Alan Catford,

 Kingsford Avenue, 
Turramurra. 
September 18



 Amazing grants 

Sir: The Australia Council's grants to foreign countries to exhibit art
(Herald, September 13) is typical of its lack of sensitivity to Australians
with the same ambitions. My company is going bankrupt and the Australia
Council is giving money to outsiders with indirect terrorist connections.
Amazing. 

 M.P Gardiner,
Director,
Parramatta Theatre Company, 
Parramatta. 
September 18



 Packaged Pope 

SIR: I was appalled at the seeming crass commercialisation (Herald, September
15) that appears to be associated with the organisation of the tour of
His Holiness, Pope John Paul II. Is there such a lack of faith in the relevance
of the gospel message which the Pope ought to be representing that it needs
to be packaged and sold like a pop festival?
  What is expected to be the outcome and achievement of the papal tour of
Australia?
  One can only hope that the medium is not the message.

 Mary Hidden,
Thomas Avenue,
Roseville. 
September 18



 Judging judges 

SIR: With all the brouhaha about the judges, one significant matter has
been overlooked. It all started with rumours about sentencing anomalies
and all of those matters were criminal matters under the "control" of the
Crown.
  The Crown did not appear to have felt that something was "amiss" or to
have sought to appeal against lack of severity of sentencing. Surely it
is more appropriate that a panel of judges look into the conduct of the
Government than the reverse.

 J.E.McDermott,
Hollowforth Avenue,
Neutral Bay.  
September 19      



 Single parents 

SIR: K.Silard (Letters, September 11) must surely realise that there is
a price to be paid for receiving single-parent benefits. Increased surveillance
is to prevent abuse of the welfare system. If there was no abuse, there
would be no surveillance.
  I disagree that "attacks on privacy will tend to diminish self-esteem
and increase dependence in the social security system". If anything, visits
by social security officers have the effect of encouraging welfare recipients
to assess their situation and weigh up the consequences of having their
lifestyle monitored in this fashion. (It is often an incentive to go and
get a job, especially when the children reach school age.)
  I haven't seen many single parents "reeling from the emotional trauma
of child birth or a marital breakdown". The single parent tends to be better
balanced emotionally than the unfortunate parents who battle to save a
failing marriage.
  I applaud the Hawke Government's plans to make single fathers contribute
to the financial upkeep of their offspring. I don't agree that the government
is creating a second-class citizen out of the sole parent. 
  We have a choice in this modern age. We can choose to be parents or to
remain childless. We can choose to be married or single. All our choices
have consequences. What does the Government have to do with it?

 Georgia Cummings,
Westminster Boulevarde,
Elanora (Qld). 
 
September 18




 Beach traffic 

SIR: John Wyndham's scenario (Letters, September 17) of illegal
four-wheel-drives sharing his seclusion at Hawks Nest is taken one step
further on the coast at Harrington and Crowdy Head.
  On those picturesque beaches, access has been constructed to facilitate the
intrusion of four-wheeled monsters in order that their occupants may enjoy
the sights or do a spot of fishing without actually using their legs.
  Despite our desire to enjoy a weekend at the beach, we would have been
foolhardy to dare to lie down to sunbake and let the children loose at the
water's edge. The risk of not being seen and hence run over is enormous.
The only solution appeared to be to take a vehicle along with us as protection
or erect a large warning flag.
  Are our lovely stretches of coastline destined to become mere car parks
for the lazy, encouraged by compliant local councils. In the words of the
song "The day Paradise put up a parking lot" is indeed here.
  What a lot of Norms we Australians are.

 Carey Buls
Gundy Road,
Scone. 
September 19




 Out of his field 

SIR: I found Lynden Barber's review of Ronnie James Dio's concert to be
one of the most aggressively acidic reports I have read in your paper (Arts
and Entertainment, September 6). His criticism of one of the most respected
musicians in the "hard rock" industry of the past decade was unjustified.
  Barber was obviously too preoccupied with the excessive number of
"dictionary-discovered" 10-letter words of such explicit grandeur and vivid
splendour for his review to appreciate Dio's exciting and captivating
performance. 
  Dio's whole stage act centres on the realms of fantasy. "My music is very
steeped in fantasy," says Dio in one interview, "I think it's sometimes better
not to remind people how awful life can be." Had Barber been aware of what Dio
was trying to express on stage, he might have used more scope, and less bias,
in his review. 
  Comments like "side-splitting" and "self-parody performed without a hint
of self-knowledge" emphasise that L.Barber is more accustomed to going to
the opera, and listening to his Bach records over and over again, than
appreciating a variation on an otherwise unrelentlessly boring rock scene.
  I certainly hope that L. Barber will stick to opera reviews (or take them
up) and leave reviews beyond his field to more knowledgeable sources.

 M. Ivanovic,
John Oxley Avenue,
Werrington. 
September 17



 Members ignored 

SIR: As active members of the ALP for the past 14 and seven years respectively,
we write to protest at the current  attitude of the leadership of the Federal
Parliamentary Labor Party.
  It is clear that the Parliamentary Labor Party does not consider itself
accountable to the membership. The federal leaders have treated with contempt
policies formulated by the party, policies endorsed by Australians at the
past two federal elections.
  The most recent examples of such a contemptuous attitude are the decision
to expose our small economy to the fluctuations of international finance
and the decision to sell uranium to France. Members of the party and others
who voted the Government into power are effectively disenfranchised by this
attitude. 
  The time has come for members of the party and concerned members of the
community to let the Parliamentary Labor Party know that we are withdrawing
our support for a Government which refuses to acknowledge the policies
it was elected to implement.

 Robert Cavanagh and 
Peter McDowell,
Macquarie Street,
Sydney. 
September 18



 City is an architectural mishmash 

SIR: The suggestion by the Sydney City Council that the present slate roof
of the Town Hall be replaced with a tin one, highlights the deplorable level
of this city's aesthetic standards.
  In the almost 200 years of white settlement of this splendid landscape,
we have managed to produce, in the Central Business District, but one
significant building structure, the shells of the Opera House (the interior
is a disaster), a few colonial buildings of note (of note only because
they were built by a very, very young country which still fortunately clung
close to its parent's aesthetics) and a vast mass of what must be the worst
buildings anywhere in the world.
  Were it not for the harbour, our blue skies and our sunlight, Sydney would
be recognised for what it is, a mishmash of crude, poorly designed, oversized
structures, mostly ill-shaped, poorly proportioned, faced with nasty materials
and producing, for the city's users, a deplorable urban environment. Having
recently returned from Italy and the US where I studied their urban fabric,
Sydney's horrors are all the more clearly evident.
  To visit Pier One or wander about The Rocks or in Martin Place is to see
the "tin roof" syndrome of this city's creators in evidence everywhere.
In what self-respecting city would its principal pedestrian space be paved
with a disease like Martin Place's pebbles or furnished with red plastic
seats and gypsy caravans? More like a poor suburban shopping centre.
  Let's start to do everything with quality and with style so that we, as
citizens, can enjoy a beautiful city and leave things of significance for
those who are to come.

 Neville Gruzman,
Queen Street,
Woollahra.  
September 20

  

 Ethnicity not evil 

SIR: While your editorial, August 17, recognises the dilemma of the Indo-Chinese
and Lebanese youth and the shortcomings of the Ethnic Affairs Commission
report, it fails to sufficiently stress the need for urgent action.
  The reply of the commission's chairman, Dr Totaro (Letters, August 12),
tends to distract us from the real issues. Frankly, I don't care who is
causing the trouble out west; the fact is it's being caused, and it must
be stopped. The pecularities of the groups causing the problems must be
identified so that solutions to accommodate those pecularities can be found.
In this case, ethnicity is highly relevant. 
  Ethnicity is not evil. No-one in Australia is expected to have cultural
amnesia. Differences in affectations, imaginations and historical experiences
are mutually appreciated and all people are asked to do in Australia is
simply to be themselves within the framework of Australian law. The Ethnic
Affairs Commission was created in this environment.
  Through a process of selection based on humanitarian and other grounds,
Australia has brought in workers for her industries. However, during periods
of economic decline, the burden of unemployment will be carried by the most
disadvantaged. Now those are the Indo-Chinese and Lebanese youth whose families
have come here in the last decade or so and who are now competing for jobs,
recognition and low-cost housing. In Britain and in other West European
countries that burden is carried by second and third generations of immigrants
of the 1960s.
  There is no use in dodging this dilemma, and ad hoc measures will not suffice.
Any measures taken (such as providing centres with youth-oriented activities,
counselling, and educational - particularly language - courses) must be
part of an overall pattern designed by today's governments. That plan must
attempt to exhaust the complexity of the interests and needs of these youth.
And implementation must begin now.

 Richard  Mitry,
President,
Sydney Lebanese Lions Club,
Castlereagh Street,
Sydney. 
August 15



 Wattle Threat 

SIR: I was perturbed at Shirley Stackhouse's recommendation for the general
planting of Acacia saligna (golden wreath wattle) (Style, August 14).
  Acacia saligna, among other species, is a great threat to the local
vegetation of the Sydney region. As Mrs Stackhouse points out, this wattle
has already become "naturalised" in a lot of areas around Sydney, thereby
endangering local species.
  The fact that the DMR has been planting A. saligna on roadside verges
is to be deplored and is a further reason to discourage the introduction
of yet more plants of this species. The DMR must itself now devise a plan
for more appropriate management of its plantings, the main thrust of which
should be suitable plantings of locally indigenous species of trees, shrubs
and ground covers wherever possible.
  In the meantime, it is very disappointing to read that the Herald's garden
columnist is encouraging the disintegration of Sydney's very special floral 
identity.

