CREDIBILITY IN TATTERS 

President Reagan of the United States has ensured that he will be a "lame
duck" during his final two years in office. The exposure this week of secret
arms sales to Iran and the redirecting of some of the proceeds to the Contra
rebels in Nicaragua, has stripped him of much of his credibility, especially
in foreign affairs.
  He seems to have eschewed advice from the professionals of the State
Department, including his Secretary of State, Mr Shultz, and placed his
trust in the amateur conservatives that he appointed to advisory positions
in the White House. These people had the backing of Mr Reagan's right-wing
supporters in the Republican Party, who have made Mr Shultz a target because
of his desire to achieve arms-control agreement with the Soviet Union and
his support of President Aquino of the Philippines. The extreme right in
the US wants no truck with communists and puts its trust only in superior
US military strength. The right has encouraged Mr Reagan in his opposition
to the left-wing Sandinista Government of Nicaragua and has financially
supported the Contras.
  The shipping of arms to Iran, a nation that the President accused of
sponsoring terrorism, was a blow to his reputation, aggravated by his public
explanation that the deal was to build better relations with so-called moderates
in the Iranian Government, rather than to secure the release of American
hostages held by Middle East terrorist groups. Surveys indicate that most
Americans do not believe him, knowing well that freeing hostages is a sacred
cause with the President. But apart from their doubts about the reasoning
behind the sale of arms, many people regard it as poor tactics. Could it
not encourage Iranian-backed terrorists to grab more hostages so that they
could be bartered for arms? Could the sale merely extend the long bloody
war between Iran and its neighbour, Iraq? Who are the moderates in Iran
and will they actually have any influence in securing peace in the Middle-East?
There has been little evidence of a rise of moderate feeling in Iran, and,
contrary to what Mr Reagan told his people, there is none that terrorist
acts by Iranian-backed groups have decreased since the arms were delivered.

Resignation and dismissal
  There was another shock for the American people in the revelation this
week that money from the sales to Iran had been improperly diverted to the
Contras during a period in which the Congress had refused to sanction such
aid. The revelation has led to the resignation of the President's National
Security Adviser, Vice-Admiral John Poindexter, and the dismissal of his
deputy, Lieutenant-Colonel Oliver North. The White House is insisting that
Colonel North acted alone in arranging the transfer of the funds to the
contras and that the President was not informed. This, however, is not washing
with either Congress or the public, even though Colonel North had helped
raise private money for the Contras. If people are expected to believe that
a second-rank aide was running his own foreign-affairs program in secret
they are entitled to ask just what sort of foreign policy is being conducted
by the White House and who is directing it, experts or Mr Reagan's supporters
on the far right.
  Neither Admiral Poindexter nor Colonel North had expertise in foreign
policy before his appointment to the White House staff and it is no wonder
Mr Shultz and his senior deputy, Mr John Whitehead, have distanced themselves
from the arms sale. Mr Whitehead told a Congressional committee hearing
this week that the Iranian affair had marred the credibility of Mr Reagan
and the United States. The reaction of the world had been "universally
negative", he said. It is rare for either the Secretary of State or the
Department of State to contradict the President in public and the fact that
it has now happened indicates the deep rift between the department and the
White House.
  If Mr Reagan succumbs to outside pressure and asks Mr Shultz to resign
because of his lack of support over the arms deal, the reputation of the
US will fall further. Mr Shultz is a trusted negotiator and well liked both
in and outside the U.S. If he went there would be no brake on the excesses
of the White House hawks. The US, the Western superpower, is the nation
that small countries depend on to preserve peace and negotiate with the
Soviet Union on reducing the nuclear arsenal. Over the final two years of
the Reagan Administration it will be difficult for the small nations to
put their full faith in the US or to end suspicions that the US says one
thing and does the opposite.
  Israel too has harmed its reputation by its role in helping to facilitate
the arms sale and because of allegations that it had a hand in the transfer
of funds to the Contras. The quest for peace in the Middle East will be
set back now that Israel has been revealed as helping to secure arms for
Iran, a nation distrusted by the moderate Arab states.  
                                                           
