A link in the festival chain  

Perth and Adelaide have their arts festivals, and so does Sydney. From today it
will be Melbourne's turn. For the next 18 days Melbourne will be host to the
Spoleto Melbourne Festival of Three Worlds, so named because it will be linked
with sister festivals in Spoleto, Italy, and Charleston, South Carolina. The
original Spoleto festival was the brainchild of the composer, Gian Carlo
Menotti. He is artistic director of the Melbourne festival, and the official
program, which will be launched tonight with Ken Russell's controversial
production of `Madam Butterfly', bears the stamp of his vision and personality. 

  Experience shows that arts festivals tend to work best in small centres
where all, or almost all, of the main events are located within walking
distance of each other. In large sprawling centres they can be lost. It
was for this reason that Mr Menotti demurred when the idea of a festival
for Melbourne was first submitted to him. The next three weeks will show
whether his initial instinct was right, or whether Melbourne will prove
the exception to the rule. Melbourne lacks the intimacy of Spoleto, Dubrovnik
or Avignon, or other such European festival cities. What it does have,
though, is the best performing arts centre in Australia. It can also boast
a range of museums, galleries and theatres which, like the Arts Centre,
will help to show off the artists and performers to the best advantage.
  The official program is rich in diversity and quality. The original fears
that the festival would be dominated by imports to the exclusion of local
works and artists have been dispelled. The dance, music and drama programs,
for example, each feature new home-grown works devised especially for Spoleto
alongside the major productions from abroad. As with Adelaide or Edinburgh,
the festival has also attracted a huge number of fringe activities which
should find  a ready audience, particularly among younger people and those
whose interests run to such things as cabaret, circus and improvisation
rather than "high art" forms like opera.
  The Melbourne festival has been backed by the Victorian Government to
the tune of $2.5 million. The money is coming not from the arts
budget, but from a special state development fund. The Government has
recognised that as well as enriching the cultural life of the community,
a festival is important in generating tourist income. The Government's support,
self-interested though it may be, is welcome. It should not be forgotten,
however, that while the Government has thrown its weight behind the Melbourne
festival, it was the Italian community and those involved with the Italian
Arts Festival in Melbourne who first floated it. It has yet to be decided
whether Spoleto Melbourne will be an annual or a biennial festival. Either
way, it promises to be a stimulating event in the city's cultural life.
                                              
