<subsample>
	<id> B09a</id>
	


	<source>The Herald - 17 November 1986</source>
	


	<h> Planely, a new train of thought </h>
	

Peking. - &quot;Would everybody please get off the plane,&quot; the stewardess announced.
&quot;We apologise for the delay. The aircraft has been struck by a truck.&quot;
  The announcement almost came as a relief. We had been sitting on the steamy
tarmac in Canton for just over an hour, waiting to take off for Peking.
I had been flying with this particular airline, because in China, it's the
only airline in town.
  At first we had been delayed because we were waiting for some late
passengers to board. This was most uncharacteristic. The late passengers
had to be high ranking party cadres.
  And then we were delayed some more, ostensibly because there had been
a mix-up in boarding passes.

  This particular airline had been known to take whole gaggles of tourists
bound for Hong Kong and deliver them to the Tibetan plateau and not seem
to care overly much.
  &quot;Probably got wind of somebody on board with a bomb,&quot; a fellow passenger
quipped blackly.
  We laughed together.
  And then we were told the plane had been struck by a truck. We disembarked
as we were told. And sure enough, it had. 
  Mobile stairs had been driven into the tail assembly of our aging Trident,
and remained jammed under the plane.
  The pilot and co-pilot had taken advantage of the convenient stairs,
and had climbed up to the tail with flashlights. In the pitch darkness they
were running their flashlights back and forth over the tail assembly in
search of damage.
  We were told to wait in the terminal, and that we would be told when we
could reboard.
  Reboard?
  Contrary to all expectations, I have discovered the Chinese to be among
the most happy, carefree, utterly laid-back people I have ever encountered.
I have also developed the firm conviction that happy, carefree, utterly
laid-back people are the very last people you would want to be running an
airline.

  &quot;X-ray! X-ray! Aren't you even going to X-ray the bloody thing?&quot; I demanded
of a bemused airline employee.
  To be fair they may have done in time. A fortunate few among us were shifted
to a different flight, and arrived in Peking only a few hours behind schedule.
  Ominously, a notice board in Peking's Capital Airport still showed the
original flight as &quot;delayed&quot;. They were apparently still planning to try
to get the thing off the ground.
  &quot;Probably waiting for the chewing gum to set&quot;, a fellow passenger quipped
blackly.
  We laughed together again.
  Why not?
  We were on the ground.
  On the ground is where you can enjoy some of the stories you hear. Like
folding chairs being put in the aisles to accommodate surplus passengers
on routes in the back of beyond.
  Probably an exaggeration.
  And like a co-pilot finding himself trapped on the passenger side of the
flight deck door by a faulty lock, only to be joined there by the pilot
who came out to investigate and also got trapped. In full view of appalled
passengers the pair then proceeded to smash in the door with a fire axe
in order to get back to the controls.
  At least so the story goes. I was not a witness.
  I have been witness to emergency exits piled high with passengers' hand
luggage. And I have been witness to flights where 10 to 20 per cent of
the seat backs were broken and would not go into an upright position.
  And I have been witness to a Trident, carrying media during the recent
Royal tour, loaded to the hilt with camera gear requiring every last precious
millimetre of runway at Kunming to get airborne. The angle of attack was
such on take-off that several passengers reported hearing the fuselage
scrape the runway.
  I did not hear this myself, but then I was trying very hard to faint at
the time.
  And I have been witness to an aircraft in which I was sitting being struck
by a truck.
  And that will just about do me for one lifetime.
                                                                       

</subsample>
