Don't fail the HSC  

THE HSC examination now in progress has renewed the debate about its
usefulness and fairness. The criticism is often heard that the HSC creates
too much pressure on school children and for this reason should be replaced
by another system.
  The argument relating to pressure is misconceived. Without doubt, candidates
sitting the HSC face enormous pressure to succeed. But this pressure is
generated not so much by the nature of HSC but by the scarcity of employment,
which makes it imperative for students to engage in desperate competition
for jobs. The HSC did not create the unemployed problem.
  On the contrary, widespread unemployment has made success at HSC crucial
to obtaining scarce jobs. 
  The argument about pressure is part of a general attempt to downgrade
the value of examinations as a form of academic evaluation. No examination
is perfect and the HSC is not an exception. The chief merits of the examination
system are objectivity, anonymity and uniformity. The alternatives
to the HSC, such as internal school assessments are bound to be tainted by
subjective standards and judgments and are very much open to error and abuse.
  A system which permits subjective and individual assessment cannot provide
fairness or equal opportunity across the board.
  Examinations can and do cause hardship in individual cases. These are
unavoidable consequences, and are in the very nature of human life.
  All that can be attempted is to lay down fair rules for everyone. Attempts
to give individual treatment to students invariably produce abuse 
and leads to greater hardship.
  If the HSC is abolished and school-based assessment is introduced, students
from schools with good reputations will be at a distinct advantage. Good
students from schools in unfashionable suburbs will be judged by the school
- as will poor students from reputed schools. This will be to the 
disadvantage of the former and the advantage of the latter.
  The HSC provides an indicator of intellectual ability, discipline and
commitment. What is the alternative?
  Pressure is a part of life. It is unavoidable. Learning to handle pressure
is part of a child's preparation for adult life. What the schools can do
is pay more attention to this aspect and help students to cope with pressure.
  The attempt to eliminate pressure by abolishing examinations is futile
and can only succeed at the expense of the integrity and quality of education

 L.J.M. Cooray, associate professor, Macquarie University, NSW.  

