Drafting a workable Constitution Special report by MALCOLM FARR  

ONE of the most easily read parts of Australia's Constitution - Section
92 - has caused 86 years of dispute and litigation involving our most
senior courts and judges.

  And it could continue to do so for another 86 years unless Justice Mervyn
Everett and his colleagues can suggest a workable replacement.
  Section 92 says quite clearly "trade, commerce and intercourse among the
States... shall be absolutely free".
  Essentially, it is taken to mean that a State cannot impose a tariff or
a duty on goods coming from another State.
  What else it means has been the subject of great debate, often in the High
Court, from grain growers, egg producers, dairy farmers and others.

Submission collection

  Their evidence is now being collected by Justice Everett, chairman of
the Advisory Committee on Trade and Economic Management - one of five
specialist committees which will report to the Constitutional Commission.
  The commission, headed by former Commonwealth Solicitor-General Sir Maurice
Byers, will make its report on a revised Constitution in June, 1988.
  Since October 13, Justice Everett's committee, currently sitting in
Brisbane, has been collecting submissions on matters ranging from the
Constitutional position of local government to the Trade Practices Act
and the importance of consumer protection.
  Its brief to cover hard economic matters doesn't seem particularly exciting
but is perhaps the most important handed out by the commission, as it deals
with dollars and cents and the nation's economic future.
  The report will probably be the thickest to be considered by the
Constitutional Commission.
  Scheduled for delivery at the end of April, it could be delayed until
May.
  One of the reasons for the delay will be that at every stop, at every
hearing, someone raises Section 92.
  "Now, those words of Section 92, I think to most people, would appear
to be extremely simple," says Justice Everett, who is also president of
the Interstate Commission and a Federal Court judge.
  "But the sad fact is that after 86 years, the situation is that most
of the cases which have gone to the High Court involving Section 92 have
resulted in split decisions between the judges.
  "To the average person, I imagine it would seem extraordinary that in
86 years there couldn't be an accepted and adopted interpretation of those
words.
  "But the judges have brought their own philosophical concepts to the
interpretation of those words.
  "They posed the question `freedom from what?' and their ideas differed."

Committee's obligation

  For example, can a State marketing authority, such as a grain board, prevent
a farmer selling produce across the border outside its authority and against
its wishes?
  The farmer might argue that Section 92 means the authority has no right
to stop the transaction.
  Can a dairy board, which licenses milk production in one State, prevent
dairy farmers jumping the border and selling their surplus without a license?
  Only the High Court can decide when the Constitution is cited in these
cases and some judges say yes to some questions and others say no.
  "It is our committee's obligation to point out the drawbacks, which for
the whole of the Australian nation occur as a result of that varying
interpretation," Justice Everett said.
  "I suppose if you analyse all the cases - and I suppose there are hundreds,
if not thousands, of them over a period of 86 years - some of them were
not very important within themselves.
  "But in numbers, certainly, and in potential importance."
  Justice Everett also sees a much broader question attached to his brief.
  "The question is: Should Australia's economy be treated as one national
economy, or in practical effect have we got six of them?" he asked.
  "Or if you add the territories, eight of them?
  "In other words, can we do better than we are doing at the present?"
  The overall review, announced almost a year ago, will also draw attention
to the Constitution itself, which according to Justice Everett has become
a subject of apathy.
  "That apathy, in my opinion, is the product of lack of information about
what the Constitution really is," he said.
  "Very few people have seen that document, let alone know what's in it."
  People must be educated in their Constitution if they are to understand
and endorse or reject any changes which might be proposed in a referendum,
Justice Everett says.
  "There are no other ways, except revolution," he says. I'm serious when
I say that."
                                                            
