<subsample>
	<id> B12d </id>
	


	<source> The Daily Sun - 28 October 1986 </source>
	


	<h> CONTENDERS
Nev Warburton's steady rise </h>
	

A FEW months ago, four Labor Premiers came to Brisbane to support Nev Warburton
in his bid for Queensland's top job.
  
  It was something of an exotic holiday and, like many Aussie tourists,
they set out to show the natives how amusing, dashing and superior they
could be.
  Comparisons were made and the obvious result was that Nev Warburton was
seen as considerably less than amusing, dashing and superior.
  The dominant logic was that because he was not like successful ALP leaders
in other States, it was doubtful that he, too, would become a Premier.
  This did not take into account that Queenslanders might not want a glib
Brian Burke or a trendy John Bannon heading their government.
  He has been the perfect figurehead in an ALP campaign which has concentrated
on government negatives. 
  The months of accusations might have appeared as ugly and desperate
muck-raking coming from a flashier Labor leader.
  If such a nice and unexcitable bloke as Nev Warburton says all these
nasty things, there might be something in them.
  He remains rather hide-bound, relatively inflexible and threatens to bore
on occasion.

Campaign

  But he has grown into the Opposition Leader's job rather than shrinking
it to his proportions.
  After a demanding election campaign, some observers are beginning to
believe Mr Warburton could also grow into the job of Premier.
  His political career is traditional ALP. He moved from top-level sport
through the trade union ranks to local government and finally to Parliament
as the member for Sandgate in 1977.
  His progress up the party ladder has been through predictable factional
support.
  In this election campaign, internal ALP divisions have been kept hidden.
In part, this is a credit to Nev Warburton's leadership.
  ALP tacticians have tried to get him to be more aggressive, but he has
insisted on sticking to his own pace.
  The opinion polls have indicated he has done the right thing. 
  It is unlikely that Nev Warburton will become Premier via the ALP winning
an outright majority of seats in this election.
  But a hung Parliament opens up all sorts of prospects, including the
extreme possibility that Labor might be asked to form a minority government
- giving Mr Warburton the top job.


</subsample>
