A clouded alternative  

If, as British politician Harold Wilson once observed, a week is a long
time in politics, the Liberal Party should contemplate how different might
be circumstances 18 months hence, for the next Australian election could
be that far away. This perspective should be tempering the heady scent of
an election victory floating from the undoubtedly successful conference
this week of the party's Federal council.
  That said, however, the Liberal Party has not in recent times presented
itself as such an attractive alternative government, even if there is an
element of default through the Labor Government's poor showing at the moment.
The Liberals appear even to have united behind their leader, Mr Howard.
And the Leader of the Opposition has tapped a community feeling and touched
these troubled times to present some potentially sound policies on such
crucial issues as taxation, economic management and industrial relations.
  Mr Howard's message of hope is based on working for ourselves, in contrast
to the Hawke theme of working together, on incentive rather than consensus.
And in being radically drier than the Labor Government, Mr Howard wants
to dismantle much of the welfare approach of the Whitlam, Fraser and Hawke
decade that has so come to stifle initiative in Australia. We are at last
starting to see the Liberal Party being bravely and responsibly the Liberal
Party and presenting a real choice in an era of wimpish political centralism.
  There are, however, dangers which cannot be ignored. The truly disadvantaged
must be reassured that they will not be ditched should a Howard government
be elected. Australia and the international markets will need to be certain
that we will not suffer disastrous disruptions through confrontational
attempts to reform union excesses. Most of all, electors will need to know
that promises are backed up by details and costings.
  "Trust me" worked for Mr Fraser and for Mr Hawke but, in an electorate
made increasingly sophisticated and edgy by awareness of the country's
economic difficulties, a philosophy alone is no longer enough. The Liberals
may feel that by being vague about their promises they are immune from
criticism or misrepresentation, but it might also be construed as cynical
manipulation or an admission of uncertainty about those promises. Only by
being more detailed can Mr Howard help us fully to understand and feel
comfortable with his far-reaching proposals.
  The Liberal Party is looking good but it cannot assume an automatic
election. It must maintain its image with solid parliamentary performance
and build on it by taking more into its confidence those who so desperately
want to believe in its message of hope.

