A grim shadow  

The news that the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Hayden, has been given
the names of suspected World War II criminals living in Australia must cause
dread at the thought of reopening old wounds and sickness at the idea that
our postwar hospitality towards displaced persons has been abused. But,
in the confusion of postwar days, and given Australia's large intake of
people from war-shattered countries, it is possible that some who should
have faced justice made their way with impunity to this country and have
for more than 40 years escaped punishment for acts no less abhorrent now
than when they were committed.
  Mr Hayden will pass the information to the War Criminals Review which
is due to report to Parliament next month on whether war criminals are
or have been resident in Australia and, among other matters, whether there
was any policy by any Australian government to allow or assist their entry.
Investigation is inevitable and proper, and we must prepare ourselves for
what it may reveal and the effects on our society.
  There could be the spectacle of people who are now aged and infirm being
arraigned for acts perpetrated when they possessed the full powers of youth,
for acts that seem incompatible with their restructured lives, for crimes
which their bewildered descendants may find impossible to believe could
ever have concerned their families' past. Thus does the brutality that afflicts
mankind from time to time cast its long and merciless shadow on the lives
of successive generations. 
  But we must remember those who perhaps have no descendants, whose families
were wiped out. The ghosts of those who were brutalised must haunt us still,
and require us to pursue justice. Our duty is not only to them but to the
future, to show that brutality is never justifiable; that violence, even
when it is part of the greater violence which is war, can never be condoned
and that justice cannot be set aside because of the passage of time and
the intervention of other wars and other cruelty. Our history must continue
to show what we abhor and that we call to account those who act with brutality,
lest we forget and allow the misery of the past to be repeated.

