Button fingers a problem  

  The impish Labor Party thorn, Senator Button, has again touched a truth
by pressing for a simplification of the the fringe benefits tax's "horrifying
paperwork". The frank senator, who also has recently questioned growth
forecasts and some other Government policies, must be giving the Prime
Minister, Mr Hawke, cause to wonder just whose side he is on. In fact, he
is on the side of common sense, and the Prime Minister would be wise to
listen.
  The Government, in its enthusiasm to stop tax-dodging rorts, failed to
think through adiministrative simplicity, as well as general equity, before
bringing in this tax. The principle is sound, morally, financially and
politically, and New Zealand has managed to accept it without the hysteria
generated here. Now we even have business leaders such as Mr Bob Ansett
talking of breaking the law and publicly branding themselves as tax dodgers
in protest.
  The Government's clumsiness should have been a godsend for the Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Howard. But he has been unable to cash in while he
does not offer an alternative. It is understandable for an Opposition Leader,
especially one who has seen too many of his aspirations to thunder plundered
by the Government, to want to leave his options open until nearer an election,
and Mr Howard has some right on his side in wanting to spell out his stand
on fringe benefits tax later as part of an overall tax strategy rather than
making policy on the run; but he gives the impression of flailing in the
dark and of even being unable to discipline his disciples.
  Mr Howard, like all right-minded citizens, would clearly like some form
of fringe benefits tax; and it is easy to suspect that the simplifications
Senator Button wants, albeit unspecified as yet, are rather what the
Opposition Leader would propose if he proposed anything. Mr Hawke, meanwhile,
cannot go on forever hoping the fuss will die down. It will not. But when
one of his senior Ministers proposes simplifications it could be the excuse
for backing down a little and cutting his political losses. If so, it will
be a welcome move towards common sense.

