<subsample>
	<id> B15a </id>
	


	<source> The News - 12 August 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Has Labor hit rock bottom? </h>
	

Just scraping home in NSW, shrouded in pre-Budget gloom, reeling from polls...


	<bl> By TONY BAKER </bl>
	

  This time last month political eyebrows shot up when Labor's commissioned
pollster Mr Rod Cameron revealed the Hawke Government would lose a theoretical
election held now.
  
  The risen eyebrows were the result of the assessment being made to business
observers attending the A.L.P. national conference in Hobart.
  What did it all mean in terms of conference factional politics?
  Also was it true? The published polls still were generally pretty good
for a government in mid-term.
  Afterwards Mr Cameron was heard to observe that it was true and, since
it was, there were pluses in being the first to say it.
  And how right he was.
  Hobart seems an age away and the days when Paul Keating was the world's
greatest Treasurer and the nation made jokes about charismatic Bob Hawke's
Messiah status seem like pre-history.
  Mid-term blues are headaches affecting all governments.
  But rarely has it been such deep blue.
  The king hit came two weekends ago with the now famous NSW by-elections
which saw Labor lose Neville Wran's old seat and his successor Barrie Unsworth
barely scrape home in another safe seat.
  The anti-Labor swings were bad enough on the numbers, sufficient if repeated
nationally to sweep the A.L.P. out of office nationally and in the States,
including SA, in the biggest landslide of the century.
  But that, calamitous as it is, does not explain wholly why it was so
devastating.  
  For that one has to go back to the mid-70s after the Whitlam dismissal
and the Fraser landslide.
  Morale was rock bottom. Then Neville Wran won State Government in NSW.
Then came the famous Wranslide re-election.
  NSW became the jewel in the Labor crown. In the party's view NSW became
the power base from which it clawed back to government across the mainland,
except Queensland, and federally.
  To face such a backlash, to lose Mr Wran's very seat, was truly traumatic.
How traumatic can be shown by the time Mr Hawke and Mr Unsworth spent on
Sunday analysing the result.
  What has been learnt about their talks is predictable to those who know
that while victory has many fathers defeat is an orphan.
  Mr Unsworth has blamed all but himself and identified such issues as the
fringe benefits tax.
  Mr Hawke, who with Mr Keating is stoutly defending the tax while having
what might appropriately be called a bob each way in hinting at administrative
changes, says this affected only 1 per cent of a swing in the order of 17
per cent.
  The evidence suggests Mr Unsworth was more correct. 
  The latest published opinion poll, in the Sydney newspaper the Sun-Herald,
conducted in three marginal seats identified Federal rather than State
issues as worrying voters.
  It showed 85 per cent of voters blaming either the Federal Government
or both Governments for the economic decline which is at the heart of the
present turn of the tide.
  In a hypothetical Federal election it gave the coalition parties 54 per
cent, Labor a derisory 30 per cent, the Democrats 10 per cent and other
6 per cent.

  ISSUES governing Labor defectors were economic policy, union influence,
taxation and poor government.
  The best that can be said for the result, not to mention the by-elections,
is that Labor faces a long battle in persuading voters its policies are
right and will work.
  And this before it has begun to sell what it acknowledges to be an
unpopular Budget.
  This goes to the core of the biggest puzzlement of the Hawke Government.
  No government in Australia has been more public relations and public
opinion minded.
  The Government's fondness for advertising campaigns to sell its policies
is well known, as well known as the Prime Ministerial taste for addresses
to the nation.
  But this Government's support now has slumped to the extent that although
the next election need not be until 1988 it may well be too late to recover.
  In the pre-history of its early days, the Hawke Government made its central
appeal to the electorate that it, and especially the Prime Minister and
Treasurer in tandem, were better economic managers than the Opposition.
  On those terms it manifestly has failed.
  The by-elections and the opinion polls show the electorate simply does
not believe either that the management is better or that events are beyond
the control of any government.
  Labor had a Messiah. As of today it needs a Lazarus.
 

</subsample>
