<subsample>
	<id> B16e </id>
	


	<source>The West Australian - 14 November 1986 </source>
	


	<h> So near ... </h>
	

IT would have been too much to expect the State Government's latest attempt
at electoral reform to have a trouble-free run through Parliament.
  The political acrimony that this issue has aroused over the past 25 years
was hardly likely to evaporate and suddenly be replaced by sweetness and
light.
  Nevertheless, the apparent deadlock over the Bill now before the Legislative
Council is a big disappointment, coming as it does after the opposing sides
had shown an inclination to retreat from previously entrenched positions.
  For the first time in the long history of the electoral-reform debate,
it had seemed that a spirit of compromise - albeit a grudging one - might
prevail. But the latest legislation is now in danger of being sacrificed -
along with its predecessors - on the altar of political self-interest.
  If this legislation fails, some major reforms which have the broad agreement
of the parties could be lost with it. These include the proposed independent
electoral commission and a system of regional proportional representation
for the Legislative Council - steps which would go some way towards making
the Upper House a more democratic institution.
  The major parties have each given ground, and the prospect of genuine
electoral reform has been brought closer than at any time in the history
of the WA Parliament.
  The Liberals have shown a significant change of attitude from their previous
refusal to budge from the status quo. And the ALP now seems to accept the
need for some electoral weighting in favour of rural areas in the Upper
House.
  But the parties have also done their arithmetic, assessed their respective
electoral fortunes and locked horns over numbers and weightings.
  Having come so close to consensus, it would be a great pity if they were
unable to thrash out their remaining differences. There are flaws in the
arguments of each side - and still room to manoeuvre.
  The road to electoral reform has been long and rocky. To abandon the recent
progress that has been made would be a shameful waste.


</subsample>
