On the carpet over buying NZ John Arthur  

PARLIAMENT HOUSE IS NEARLY ALL HOME-MADE

  Australians hate the idea of overseas products being bought to furnish
the lavish billion-dollar new Parliament House.
  And they are as keen as rabbits to buy Australian-made items in
supermarkets.  
  But the ideal is not easy to live up to.
  It is an ideal which forced Prime Minister Robert James Lee Hawke to do
a near-strip on national television this week to prove HE was buying
Australian from his jocks to jacket.
  And, wary that Australians quickly spot the nonsense of Government waste
or stupid purchasing policies, he made the right noises.

Question
 
  Easily the most popular question put to the PM was: Why are we buying
New Zealand carpets for the new Parliament House?
  Why are we buying Italian glasses for the new Parliament House?
  "I just don't agree with those decisions," said Mr 68 per cent. "I can't
answer for every authority but I would say to you quite clearly that as
far as this Government is concerned now we are going to be pushing at
the level of government purchases for a preference for Australian products."
  It was great stuff, even though it didn't mean much. The Parliament House
Construction Authority already gives preference to Australian-made products.
Overseas tenders are loaded with a penalty averaging about 20 per cent.
  Thus the authority claims that 95 per cent of the input for the new
Parliament House is Australian.
  New Zealand carpet is an exception because there is a reciprocal agreement
between the two countries for free trade.
  The biggest non-Australian purchase probably has been in small wares
(crockery, cutlery, linen, crystalware).
  The authority claims it's impossible to buy locally-made knives and forks.
  And there are other problems in buying Australian. A Brisbane marble
manufacturer who complained that his product was as strong and reliable
as overseas marble purchased for the House mailed some samples to my office.
  They broke.
  And, as Mr Hawke was told during his hour-long TV appearance this week,
consumers will have problems discovering what IS Australian.
  "OK, the products in the supermarket may be grown in Australia, but it
is packaged overseas," one woman consumer told him.
  "In the clothing line, (there are clothes) designed in Australia but
manufactured in Taiwan, (or) manufactured in Hong Kong ... China.
                
  CHRISTMAS Island, 3 1/2 hours from Perth by air, sounds like the place
to go for frustrated Swan River crabbers. 
  Perth developer Frank Woodmore, who on Tuesday got Cabinet's in-principle
approval for a $30 million casino-hotel complex there, reports:
  "In the crab season, starting in November and going through to February,
these giant red land crabs come running out of their burrows and cover the
roads like a thick coat of vegemite.
  It's unbelievable. They're endemic to Christmas Island. They are about
the size of a dinner plate and relatively inedible.
  "There's also the blue robber crab, which is very good eating. They're
enormous, about 1 1/2 dinner plates across."
                                            
