MELBOURNE
with LEE TINDALEBLASTS OVER DUCK HUNT  

  THERE are Victorians callous enough to get together on the eve of the
duck season and run sweeps on the number of human casualties the weekend
will produce.
  In some sophisticated competitions, there is a bonus prize for correctly
guessing the number of foot wounds, shot feet being commonly associated
with the process of loading a shotgun.
  Those who play these games are the extremist fringe of a silent majority
who regard the February duck opening as a joke.
  At the other end of the scale are two vocal minorities. The shooters,
who regard it as a religion, and the conservationists-animal liberationists,
who call it an outrage. Then again, there is Joan Kirner.

  MS Kirner is State Minister for Conservation, Forests and Lands and she
copped both barrels from the hunters this week for suggesting a few amendments
to their ritual.
  Quite apart from advocating a shooter-education programme, including a
bird-identification course (ducks go quack, pelicans don't), Ms Kirner
proposed that the first shot next season be held back four hours, until
10 am.
  It might she said, separate responsible duck hunters from those who go
out to "booze and blast."
  Ten o'clock? As Charlie Brown might say, good grief. 
  Earthy former Premier Sir Henry Bolte, a keen duck shooter from way back,
was among the front-runners into the fray.
  "What if it's a stinking hot day?" said Sir Henry. "You'll be shooting
in all the heat."
  
  A NEW benchmark for crass stupidity, said Ms Kirner's National Party
counterpart, David Evans.
  "How naive is she to believe that shooters will sit by, seeing ducks flying
overhead and watching their clocks tick slowly towards 10?" Mr Evans said.
  Victorian Field and Game Association publicity officer Graham Eanes tacitly
admitted that some liquor might be involved in duck-shoot openings.
  He said a delayed start would give irresponsible shooters more time to
"suck more cans."
  Personally, the duck season brings annually to mind the opening verse
of a work by Tom Lehrer, American musical satirist who made waves in the
1960s:
      I always will remember, 'twas a year ago November,
      I went out to hunt some deer on a morning bright and clear,
      I went and shot the maximum the game laws would allow:
      Two game wardens, seven hunters and a cow.

  WE have heeded the words of Frank Purcell and sworn off skinny-dipping
at Werribee this summer.
  You could tell Mr Purcell, a local councillor, was displeased this week
when Campbell's Cove, a beach in his precinct, was proclaimed for nude
bathing. But did he jump up and down and froth at the mouth?
  No. Rather, he took a fully-clad reporter to the scene and pointed out
some home truths.
  For one thing, Campbell's Cove adjoins an RAAF shooting range. For another,
he said, it's polluted. And he indicated a drain which carries water and
various nasties through the shire into Port Phillip Bay.
  The sand is not only sparse, but coarse. Not really the stuff to comfortably
accommodate bare buttocks.
  The beach stinks of seaweed and it's hard to ignore the rubbish tip.
  And the clincher:
  "This is a great area for tiger snakes," said Mr Purcell. "There are lots
around here."
  It takes a spartan sort of sunlover to get it all off on bayside beaches,
which are none of your Scarboroughs or Cottesloes. We wonder what sort of
masochist will bare the lot at Campbell's Cove.
                                                 
