<subsample>
	<id> B20d </id>
	


	<source> National Times on Sunday - 26 October 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Can the truth be told? If so, who'll listen? </h>
	

A TEN Can the truth be told? If so, who'll listen?
T is put up. A peaceful demonstration  begins. But since the issue
is peace and the demonstrators are neither retired generals nor military
strategists but radical women (who have demonstrated for peace before,
and can be counted on to do so many times again), the beginning of the affair
is, from the standpoint of the Australian public, invisible.
  The media are generally interested only in demonstrations that do violence,
either physical or to the sensibilities of their audience. When both kinds
of violence occur together, as the peace women of Parliament House found
in the second week of their protest, the media become very interested indeed.
There are many affronts to logic in the clash on the parliamentary lawns,
and all of them have been exhaustively covered in the media save the one
contained in the media's own rules: if the protest is peaceful, ignore it;
if it is violent, deplore it.
  We are not, in general, sufficiently aware of how much the media are limited
to telling only stories that fit prevailing images. In Salem, it would have
been difficult to publish a news report sympathetic to a witch. Unconventional
behaviour may be reported - indeed, its reportage is encouraged - but only
from a conventional point of view. The stranger the behaviour, the more
distant the coverage. Thus the women of Parliament House, for all their
extraordinariness, were presented to us like stereotypes in cardboard -
for all their clamour, they remained mute.
  This might be called the popular end of the limit to the media's power.
At the other end is the limit set by authority, and it, too, was on display
at Parliament House this week. In the days after Lionel Murphy's death,
the media (and this newspaper in particular) were dealt with by those in
power in a manner that can only be construed as intimidatory. It is not
a time to go over the events of the past three years, save to say that they
would have taken a different course had the Prime Minister stuck to his
instincts and established a judicial inquiry into the judge's conduct at
the outset.
 

</subsample>
