S. Africa's trial by gold starts  

IT now looks as though South Africa is at the portal of new agonies which
will combine trial by gold with trial by blood.
  This is the real meaning of the US Senate's decision last week to override
any possibility of a presidential veto for real, hard-hitting sanctions
against the separate, increasingly desperate tribes that make up the political
entity of South Africa.
  The gigantic forces that are being unleashed in that beatiful and gravely
unhappy country now seem to be accelerating toward what may be a long period
of bloody revolutionary and counter-revolutionary activity.
  But in reality, the threat is not merely to southern Africa, but to the
prospects of world security.
  Just as we all might have had cause for hope that the world was entering
a period of unprecedented peace and security underwritten by a growing
detente between the US and the Soviet Union, an explosion in South Africa
could open up another running sore of bitter confrontation and raging
propaganda. 
  The proposed US sanctions are far from the stroke of a feather wielded
by Mr Hawke and Mr Hayden (who on recent indications would be quite happy
to see Australia step in to take over America's grain market in South Africa).
  They will put tremendous pressure on existing American investment there,
bringing about at the very least a complete cessation of industrial expansion
and rising unemployment (and discontent) among both black and white workers.

  THE great irony is that in all probability the only government in the
world which is really prepared for the ramifications of an effective network
of sanctions is that of South Africa.
  The more sanctions bite, the worse the violence becomes, the higher the
price of gold and platinum soars and the stronger the financial foundations
of the government become.
  Pretoria has the demonstrated power and the brutal will to smash mass
demonstrations by the black workforce. It has the financial, material and
military resources to sustain its authority.
  Just as importantly, it has the propaganda skills to create major divisions
in the Western world, particularly that part of it which is white, middle class
and in many cases vaguely racist.
  The truth is that any truly effective measures taken by the outside world
to help any particular population group in South Africa are going to end
by hurting all the inhabitants of that country.
  Sanctions are the beginning of a new and intensified period of agony.
Before they contribute to irreversible violence, those imposing them should
make another, concerted effort to find the basis for a non-violent solution.
                                      
