America equal to the task  

THE United States is in the process of proving yet again that the price
of freedom is eternal vigilance against its own government.
  Whether President Reagan himself ordered and presided over a systematic
campaign to hoodwink, bypass and defy Congress is not yet proven but there
is, at the very least, the strongest cause for concern.
  It is now undoubted that such a campaign was run and that its aim was
to shrug off the limits on foreign adventurism imposed on the Reagan
administration by a wary Congress. Who was responsible will be revealed as
inquiries proceed in the full glare of media spotlights.
  There are two messages for the thoughtful. The first is that one of the
two most powerful men in the world must, whoever he is, chafe under restraints
on his power. But some presidents have managed to achieve greatness without
regarding themselves as above the law. The second message is that there
was genius indeed in the ranks of those who drew up the American constitution.
  The strength of US institutions which carried the nation through Watergate
and its aftermath is being drawn on again now, and will prove adequate to
the challenge. America is often reviled and berated around the world, but
it is the country's greatest attribute that for every question asked and
criticism heard outside its boundaries, five of each are heard within.
No nation is so self-questioning, no country more aware of its own
imperfections.

NOW a new bout of navel-contemplation will ensue as the tragic flaws in
one of the most popular presidents in US history become daily more plain.
It is a process both painful and self-renewing for America, and ultimately
it is cleansing.
  Much of the criticism of the US heard in Australia is at least partly
justified. But even America's critics would do well to pause now, to watch
and listen and to marvel. At times careless of foreign friends, arrogant
and even imperialist, the United States can be the most irritating of friends
as well as the most ominous of enemies. But it is a great nation in its
defence of its own democracy even against itself.
  At bay now, President Reagan is saying the present crisis is all the fault
of a too-inquisitive press. Only his most unquestioning admirers will agree
with him. Richard Nixon said something similar and, finally, no one agreed
with him.
        
