The JON HALL view  

  NEXT time you're out in your car, cruising through your local suburban
streets, take a good look around.
  Among your fellow road-users you will notice some good drivers, some
not-so-good drivers, and some bloody awful drivers.
  It is the latter group that I wish to discuss.
  Let me attempt to describe your average weekday morning drive to work.
  You pull out of your drive and proceed along a single lane road. Approaching
a street off to the right, the car in front of you slows and moves to the
right hand side of the lane.
  You naturally move to the left hand side, anticipating the vehicle in
front doing a right hand turn. Wrong.
  You're about five metres away, about to pass on the inside when suddenly,
with a single flash of the left blinker, the ignoramus whips across in front
of you into a driveway.
  Fortunately, it is early, and your mind is alert. You slam on the brakes
and swing right, easily avoiding a collision by a good three inches.
  Bert Newton is chatting happily away on the radio, and you have a chuckle
at one of his ad-lib ads.
  You continue down the same single lane road. Up ahead there is a school
bus taking on some passengers.

  Estimate distance      

  You estimate the distance between the bus and yourself and calculate
how long it is going to take for the remaining four kids to board.
  The answer? The last child should be on board about the time you pass
the bus.
  So right! For as soon as that last leg disappears inside the door, on
goes the bus's blinker, and out it pulls, apparently oblivious to your presence
on the road.
  So it's down through the gears and on with the brakes.
  It's at this time that the oncoming lane, previously deserted, now becomes
choc-a-bloc, giving you no chance to overtake the bus until 10 minutes later,
about five kilometres further on, when it stops to pick up another load. 
  The eight o'clock news comes on the radio. It is all very depressing.
  You come to a roundabout. Only one other car is in sight, about to enter
from the right.
  You slow down and come to a stop, law-abidingly giving way, even though
you could have probably flown through without hindering the other car.
  The other cas slows down and comes to a stop. You look across, wondering
what is going on.
  You notice the driver staring intently into the rear-vision mirror, brushing
her hair.
  "Oh well," you think, "I might as well go for it."
  You edge out into the roundabout, only to be almost wiped out.
  The hair-brusher, finally realising that she has right of way, has dropped
the clutch and kangaroo-hopped at breakneck speed through the intersection.

  Heart misses

  Your heart misses a few beats.
  You continue your journey, noticing the petrol gauge is below empty,
and the temperature gauge suggests you haven't checked the radiator for
three weeks.
  You fail to see any humor in Bert Newton playfully tongue-lashing his
sound man.
  You come to a T-intersection where you need to turn left.
  You look right and see a single car approaching. You decide to jump on
the gas and get into the lane.
  No, too late, it's too close. Well, it is going slow, I could make it.
Bugger, too late now.
  All these thoughts cross your mind, and you end up waiting.
  The car turns left just before reaching you, no indicator signalling
its intent.
  Enough is enough.
  Down goes your window as you scream "What d'ya think those flashing lights
on your car are used for goose."
  So you complete your left hand turn.
  Just up ahead, you spy a truck nosing out of a side street. "No," you
think to yourself, "he wouldn't."
  He does.
  You check your rear vision mirror.
  There's absolutely nothing else on the road behind you, yet this misbegotten
driver decides he can't wait another ten seconds, and laboriously drags
his 16-wheeler out in front of you.
                                 
  Winding hill

  Naturally enough, directly ahead is a winding, one kilometre hill.
  The truck manages to accelerate to a magnificent 15kmh, before dropping
back below double figures on the steep gradient.
  By the time you get to the top of the hill, there is a line of 18 cars
trailing along behind you.
  The law of the jungle then prevails, as all 18 cars move into the right
lane to overtake, while you sit tucked behind the truck, suffocating on
diesel fumes.
  You successfully negotiate your way onto the freeway and pull out into
the right lane to pass a slower car.
  Naturally you leave a safe distance between yourself and the car in front.
  This safe distance is regarded as an ideal opening for one of those dreaded
lane-switchers.
  You know exactly what is about to happen when you notice a car streak
up on your left.
  He drives into the gap you have left, and then, finding himself almost
on top of the car in front of him, slams on the brakes.
  Your body and mind go on full alert as you expertly apply the brakes
just enough to avoid slamming into the lane-switcher, and not quite enough
to allow the tailgater behind you to ram into your rear end.
  You finally arrive at work and turn off the engine and slump back in the
seat, bathed in sweat.
  You tell Bert Newton to shut up about what a nice day it is.
  And just think, in eight hours, you've got to do it all again.

