dave pincombe ... on TV, radio and showbiz
There was movement at the stations ...
Aiton, Scanlan to return?  

  THE  big names are flying in the wake of last week's dramatic ratings
results - and two former 3DB stars are top of the list.
  
  Morning talkster Doug Aiton is the hottest of HOT favorites to take over
from Alan Stokes in the 10 o'clock to noon slot on 3LO next year.
  And acid-tongued sometime-breakfast man Denis Scanlan is tipped to return
to the Melbourne Airwaves, too.
  Aiton, who has been doing weekends on 3AW since his displacement when
Bert Newton took over DB in May, will fill Derryn Hinch's shoes over the
next six weeks while the Mouth That Roars gives his vocal chords a rest.
 But come 1987, the betting is odds-on that the amiable Douglas will get
the nod from Broadcast House.
  Aiton's easy-flowing, non-controversial style would suit Aunty's needs
very nicely for the late morning program.
  Scanlon, too, could be on the way back. For the past four years he has
been program manager at 3GL Geelong, but he still has a large metropolitan
following.
  I believe he's been sounded out by at least one station.
  Scanlan left 3DB in anger early in 1982 after the management dropped his
morning program to make way for Keith McGowan.
  Despite the offer of an evening program, the controversial Scanlan severed
his long association with DB ... and some bitterness remains.
  Properly produced, he would be a real force in Melbourne talk radio, God
knows, there are some stations that need a few winners. He told me: "There
have been fairly regular approaches by Melbourne stations.
  "But I've been very happy and it would have to be an extremely appealing
proposition. The lifestyle down here is hard to beat."
  Meanwhile, back at 3LO, I also believe there'll be movement at the station
in the breakfast show, where those in the know say Rod McNeil, the man who
took over from the late Peter Evans, will not be back to accompany our Corn
Flakes, coffee and early morning indigestion next year.
  My spy deep within the fusty portals of LO tells me the honeyed tones
of Mary Adams are favored to greet us as we somnambulate around the kitchen
and bathroom and headache our way through peak-hour traffic next year.
 
  CHANNEL Two 7.30 Report host John Jost is now odds-on to stay with the
program next year.
  I believe Jost has decided to turn his back on a tempting offer to replace
Mark Day as compere of Channel Seven's Day By Day.
  It's now odds-on that he will re-sign with Two .. and the never-ending
saga of the search for a Day By Day compere continues. 
  Since Mark Day announced his decision to quit, the industry has played
a busy game of "pick the compere".
  But unfortunately for Channel Seven all logical contenders seem to have
pulled out of the race.
  The program finishes for the Christmas break on December 19 and resumes
on January 5.
  Producer Mike Daly left Day By Day a week ago and Norm Beaman and Marianne
Latham are producing the show until Christmas.
  Paul Barber will take over the reins in January, but he might be faced
with an embarrassing problem.
  Like who will be up front as Day By Day anchorman?
  So far, industry scuttlebutt has had everybody from Mickie de Stoop and
Geraldine Doogue to Lois Lane as a potential compere.
  One thing IS certain. Day By Day would need a host with the powers of
Superman to lift it above Sale Of The Century and Neighbors in the ratings.

