<subsample>
	<id> B23f </id>
	


	<source> The Sunday Sun - 26 October 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Coalition best poll outcome </h>
	

  Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen's National Party over the years has been a shining
beacon for private enterprise in Australia.
  In an over-regulated country, Queensland stood out as a State where business
could get things done.
  An enterprise could always get a quick yes or no answer out of the Queensland
Government on a proposed development.
  Also, private enterprise paid its share, some would say more than its
share, of taxes and charges towards the running of Queensland.
  The Bjelke-Petersen Government also has been a front-runner in reform
of industrial relations. It led the way in the Queensland power industry
dispute in establishing a strike-free environment for an essential service.
In essence, the Government took on bad unionism and won.
  The Queensland Government has been diligent and persuasive in championing
State rights at a time when it has been increasingly fashionable to give
way to centralism.
  
  Image tarnished

  In recent years the `positive' Queensland image has been tarnished by
allegations of corruption and cronyism and, increasingly, the Queensland
Government message has seemed to move on from `we are putting Queensland
first' to one of `we know what is best for the voters, just trust us, never
you mind your heads about how we do it'.
  In fact, in its enthusiasm, the Queensland Government has almost become
Queensland Incorporated.
  It has failed to keep a proper distance between the elected Government
and private enterprise. Favors have undoubtedly been given that should
never have been bestowed.
  We believe country electorates should have some weighting in the electoral
system, especially in a State that relies so much on rural industry.
  But in its efforts to keep Queensland Incorporated in business free of
challenge, Queensland now has a shamefully gerrymandered electoral system.

Possible results

  There are four possible results of next Saturday's election:
- Absolute majority for the Nationals and continuation of the status quo.
- Retention by the Nationals of its position as the larger of the two non-Labor
parties, but without an absolute majority, and where Labor did not have
the numbers to form a Government by itself.
- Absolute majority for the ALP. Opinion polls indicate this is unlikely.
- Emergence of the Liberal Party as the larger of the two non-Labor parties,
which together would outnumber Labor. This could result in the formation
of a Liberal-National coalition with the Liberals the senior partners.
  We believe the best outcome would be the election of a coalition in which
the Liberal Party would be returned in a much stronger position.
  This would bring in some new faces and broaden the base and the appeal
of a non-Labor Government.


</subsample>
