<subsample>
	<id> B24a </id>
	


	<source> The Sunday Mail (SA) - 26 October 1986 </source>
	


	<h> URANIUM ROW FLARES AGAIN  </h>
	


	<bl> ONLOOKER
Randall Ashbourne </bl>
	

  The uranium debate is about to explode again within the Labor Party
following the leaking of internal BP briefing notes on the backroom political
manouevres relating to Roxby Downs.

  The papers reveal: which Hawke Government Ministers want to over-ride
Labor's already watered-down uranium policies; how pressure might be applied
to bring about a satisfactory result; and the backstabbing of at least one
Bannon Government Minister by another Minister's assistant.

  Explosive

  In short, the papers are as potentially explosive as uranium itself.
  The documents were leaked last week to anti-nuclear groups in Melbourne.
They are confidential briefing notes prepared for the Roxby Downs joint
ventures, Western Mining and BP, and have been confirmed as authentic.
  And they're explosive enough to tear apart the Federal Cabinet, State
Cabinet and the A.L.P generally.
  For example, several of the documents reveal the battle between State Health
Minister, John Cornwall, and Mines Minister, Ron Payne, over doubts about
health and safety at Roxby.
  Dr Cornwall has been trying since early 1985 to tighten radiation control
measures at the mine - a move first revealed in The Sunday Mail a month
ago.
  The papers reveal J. Austin and R. Ritchie (of BP), G. Whitlam and Hugh
Morgan (Western Mining) discussed the proposed changes with Premier John
Bannon and his then chief assistant, Geoff Anderson, in Adelaide, on September
18.
  The documents state:
  &quot;Bannon said he did not wish to negotiate the issue in this meeting, because
the Minister of Mines and Energy and the Minister of Health would have
to be present to do this.
  &quot;He expressed his desire to settle the matter soon, but said there were
yet further changes to be made to the proposed amendments.
  &quot;After the meeting we moved to Parliament House to visit Hon. Ron Payne,
Minister of Mines and Energy.

  Radiation

  &quot;Payne left little doubt in his comments that he accepts our view that
the policing of radiation regulations at Olympic Dam should be in the hands
of the Mines Department.
  &quot;Payne said that Cornwall takes the view that he doesn't want on his
shoulders the 40 extra cancer deaths'.&quot;
  A later &quot;strictly confidential file note&quot; reports that it will be &quot;important
for BP to be active in community sponsorships etc, in and around Adelaide,
in order to ensure community acceptance of BP if the uranium debate heats
up in that State.&quot;
  The note also reports these details of a visit to Adelaide on October
6 and 7:
  &quot;Discussions were held with Des Petherick, secretary to the Minister
of Mines and Energy, and Paul Woodland, assistant to the Minister.
  &quot;Des is the public servant and has held the position for 8 years. Paul
is a recent appointment and is the political adviser with a very good
awareness of the political scene and the consequences of any decisions
that may affect Roxby Downs. He came to the Minister's office from the
Office of the Opposition Leader in the Northern Territory.
  &quot;The radiation problem is currently with Paul and has assured me that
it will be solved and will phone me with the result perhaps next week.
  &quot;It was confirmed to me that the Minister of Health has taken the uranium
debate very seriously mainly because he is up for preselection and, as
he has made a number of blunders lately, he may well be pandering to the
Left to secure preselection.
  &quot;There appears little likelihood that the Bill will get anywhere near
the Parliament in its current form.
  &quot;The Minister's office did raise one concern with me and that was the
habit of Roxby Management Services and Hugh Morgan to continually run to
the top every time a problem with the project comes to light.

  Offside

  &quot;They said the result was that the public service was being put offside
and that we shortly will be labelled like `the boy who cried wolf.&quot;
  The note goes on to say Dr Cornwall's stand on tighter radiation controls
for Roxby workers is being backed strongly by the Health Commission,
particularly the Director of Public Health, Dr Chris Baker.
  And it recommends keeping an eye on the Minister.
  It states:
  &quot;The Minister will continue his current line, but I have been assured
rational decisions will be taken by the Premier and Minister for Mines and
Energy. In view of the Minister's need to gain preselection and with his
recent defeats, namely marijuana and redistribution of wealth, I suggest
RMS (Roxby Management Services) be asked to monitor closely any new schemes
he may come up with.&quot;
  There are several points in the notes with which Labor's anti-nuclear
supporters are going to have a field day at tomorrow's Cabinet meeting
and the next A.L.P. State Council meeting.
  The first is that Ron Payne apparently acknowledges there will be &quot;forty
EXTRA cancer deaths&quot; at the mine.
  Other points are: the news that BP plans to boost its public relations
spending to &quot;ensure community acceptance&quot;; that a Ministerial assistant
has been discussing a Minister's preselection in unfavorable terms; that
WMC chief, Hugh Morgan, goes running to the top every time a problem occurs;
and that BP wants to closely monitor the activities of a Minister.
  The notes also are certain to create a new split in the Hawke Government,
still reeling from the party's reaction to the renewal of uranium sales
to France and the issue of mining at Kakadu. They reveal that Roxby wants
to sell uranium to Taiwan, even though the proposal is against Australia's
nuclear safeguards policy and the Foreign Affairs Department believes it
could upset relations with China.
  They also discuss informal agreements with the Trade Minister, John Dawkins,
for &quot;special consideration&quot; to be given to get around the floor price for
uranium sales on some contracts.

  &quot;Revisions&quot;

  One document, dated October 8, states: &quot;During our earlier discussions
with him concerning revisions to the (floor price) formula, Dawkins made
it clear that his preferred situation would be to do away with the floor
price controls.
  &quot;The political costs of such a move would be unacceptably high, however,
and we can expect that the reversed formula will be with us for a while.&quot;
  One Federal Labor backbencher said last night the revelations meant &quot;Dawkins
is gone.&quot;
  

</subsample>
