MPs PUT ON THINKING CAPS FOR PAY RISE ONLOOKER
 Randall Ashbourne  

  State MPs have started considering how they might achieve a post-Christmas
pay increase of the Clayton's variety.

  The Parliamentary Salaries Tribunal sent out letters last week to the
State's 69 MPs telling them to prepare their arguments for a hearing on
the matter in mid-February.
  The tribunal is likely to hear some imaginative submissions.
  Because of public controversy about MPs' pay rises in recent years, when
many workers have suffered pay cuts in real terms, the tribunal no longer
sets salaries.
  They're adjusted automatically, in line with national wage decisions.
  Nowaday's the tribunal considers only the MPs' electorate allowances,
which top-up the pay packets by amounts ranging from $35,200 (for the scattered
seat of Eyre) to $10,850 (for those with metropolitan electorates).

  Approved increases

 Those electorate allowances were set last April when the tribunal approved
increases which ranged from $3065 to $6601.
  Despite the rises, most MPs claim they were better off a year ago - before
Federal Treasurer, Paul Keating, decided MPs allowances were a taxable
perk.
  Many say that the new rules have left them up to $8000 a year out-of-pocket,
compared with the old, tax-free allowance system.
  And the new rules are complex, disallowing some of the claims MPs regard
as legitimate expenses - such as having lunch with a particular lobby group
to discuss the effect of proposed new laws.
  Now that the allowances are taxed at the highest marginal rate, there
is little benefit to MPs in having them considered as a separate arrangement.
  So, some are considering suggesting to the tribunal that the allowances
should be abolished and the amount paid as normal salary.
  One might think such a move would be merely a Clayton's pay rise, since
the average MP would not be getting any more than under the existing system.
  Yet.
  The cleverness behind such thinking is that all MPs eventually retire.
  And their superannuation lump sums and pensions are based on the six best
years of salary.
  How much better to claim a pension based on a salary of $55,000 or $75,000
a year, than on a salary of about $42,000, with one's electorate allowance
discounted.
  If the tribunal approved such a move, some MPs would get another $100,000
in their lump sum payout and pensions would increase by more than $5,000
a year.
  Whether, however, the potential for a better golden handshake would be
enough to turn around the growing problem of attracting high-calibre
candidates is another matter.
  Liberal Party State secretary, Nick Minchin, conceded recently that MPs
pay is not sufficiently attractive to many private sector high-fliers who
aren't independently wealthy.
  Recently a study of more than 200 Australian companies made by the executive
recruiting firm, Korn-Ferry International, discovered many company directors
were receiving considerably less than many accountants and lawyers.
  It put the average director's salary at about $104 an hour.
  But a backbench MP working a 40-hour week earns only $18 an hour - and
with night sittings of Parliament and electorate functions ranging from
school council meetings to sports days, many politicians work at least a 60
hour week.
 
  Corner garage

  Even the Premier, Mr John Bannon, with a salary roughly double that of
backbenchers, probably averages less than $30 an hour - somewhat less than
the labor rates commonly applied by the corner garage, the TV repair-man,
and a good number of selfemployed tradesmen.
  Certainly $800 a week would seem like the impossible dream to shop assistants
and clerks earning only $280, and even vehicle builders earning less than
$400, which explains much of the public animosity directed towards MPs'
pay rises.
  But it must seem like petty cash to many lawyers, accountants, and
businessmen and other professionals. So far, the problem has had little
effect on the Labor Party.
  But the impact on the Liberals is obvious already and likely to grow
considerably worse.
  Coupled with its no-guarantees preselection system, the salary levels
seem to be preventing the Liberals from finding a street-smart lawyer to
run for a Lower House seat.
  Labor, too, may run into problems eventually.
  Many of its best performers are products of the protest movement of the
1970s.
  Vietnam and conscription politicised then university students like John
Bannon and Lynn Arnold.
  Their anger and commitment lived on, even after Whitlam pulled out the
troops - giving the SA Labor Party a pool of street-experienced and
highly-educated talent to push into Parliament.
  So far, the '80s have produced no similar catalyst. If anything, the lack
of surefire job security has depoliticised the universities, making many
students more concerned with high marks than high ideals.
  Meanwhile, however, the issue of MPs' pay isn't the only one being discussed
in Parliament House.
  The parliamentary attendants, who earn about $320 a week excluding overtime,
have been pressing for a pay rise for more than a year.
  They're unhappy that few of the politicians have taken any interest in
their wage case.
  Because of the long hours they work when Parliament is sitting, the
attendants asked also if they might not have access to the proper meals
served in the three MPs dining rooms at night.
  No, said the MPs.

