Parents must be made responsible  

  CONGRATULATIONS to Howard Sattler for his support of Ian Laurance's Private
Member's Bill to make parents responsible for the consequences of their
children's behavior.
  This commonsense proposal is long overdue and deserves the full support
of all our parliamentarians. This one single act would go a long way to
restoring order in our community.
  For years now the community has suffered the consequences of libertarian
lawmakers and civil liberties propagandists who have promoted the concept
of rights and ignored responsibilities and consequences. The  practical
effects of this now confront us all.      
  To name just one, increasing taxes and government charges are needed
to finance Australia's massive welfare bill caused in the main by the breakup
of families and the abandonment of parental responsibility.
  Also the financial cost to the community of vandalised schools and stolen
cars would be enormous.

 BARRY T. MORGAN,
Samson. A grave threat  

  John Ormond's article about "union images" in the Sunday Times of November
23 is correct in reporting that I am in WA to discuss with the unions the
propaganda war that has been launched against them by the New Right.
  But I am certainly not here, as Mr Ormond suggests, to "teach" or "show"
the unions how to use the same propaganda techniques to combat New Right
propaganda. Indeed, I am flatly opposed to their doing so because I regard
those techniques as a grave threat to our democratic system.

 ALEX CAREY,
University of NSW. Tour agents hit  

  CONGRATULATIONS on publishing the letter, "Travel Trouble" by Michael
Warrener (ST. Nov 16). I have been a travel professional for more than
20 years.
  There is no way we can compete with non-profit organisations and I often
wonder how the non-travelling members of credit unions would feel if they
knew how much they were losing by the huge discounts given on travel sales
to members and non-members alike.

 JANE BLADES (Mrs),
Gooseberry Hill. Let's hear it for Australia  

  EVERYBODY is gearing  up for that lovely time of year, Christmas. Carols
By Candlelight should cause us to reflect on what we are celebrating - the
birth of a Savior - and that this is not just a time to give gifts just
for the sake of giving. 
  Although I enjoy these nights of carol-singing, I wish more Australian
carols could be included in the repertoire. They are beautiful, both in
words and music, and are something to be proud of, along with our flag and
anthem.
  The carols I have in mind are those by John Wheeler (words) and William
G. James (music), but I have never heard them sung in the 18 years I have
lived in Australia.

 M.BAILEY (Mrs),
Wanneroo Kids have to sweat it out  

  IT has taken our first hot day with temperatures over the 30s, for the
yearly plight of teachers and pupils, to come to the fore. It was heartbreaking
to watch the children pass my door - hair wet and looking absolutely exhausted
after a day in classrooms, especially pre-fabs, which have no cooling system
whatsoever.
  I wonder what condition our politicians would be in if they were brought
out of their air-conditioned, comfortable offices and put into one of the
classrooms for just one whole day during the summer.
  It's strange money can always be found when it comes to vote-catching
items, such as the "dolling up" of Freo, or casinos, but not, it seems,
for the basic comfort of students and teachers.

 IDA GOODY,
Forrestfield. Time for truth  

  THE WA branch of the AMA is to be highly recommended for its Smoking
Death Cards Project.
  As the son of an emphysema victim, and the brother-in-law of a lung cancer
victim, I feel it is time for politicians - and the tobacco industry -
to acknowledge the facts and stop clouding the issue with trivia and
falsification.

 G.W.W. DRINKALL,
Director of Health Services, 
Western Australian
Conference of Seventh-Day Adventists. Hoist missing  

  HAVING just experienced the pleasure of sitting in a bus talking to my
friend who happens to be an electric wheelchair user in America, I am struck
by how we take non-accessibility for granted here.
  When I saw the America's Cup buses, new and modern, I looked in vain
for the wheelchair hoist.
  Perhaps when all the potential users and their friends write to TransPerth,
this issue will be given adequate attention.

 LEONIE RAMONDT,
Maylands, Tuition impeded  

  REGARDING your article, "Education `rush' stirs Opposition" (ST. Nov,
16), how can the Government justify salaries totalling more than $290,000
for four new positions in the education system when it cannot even provide
funds for computers and four-year-old pre-school as promised in its election
campaign?
  If those who supposedly run the department cannot do the job, then the
Government should get rid of them, as any normal business would.
  As a parent and ex-teacher, I am appalled to know that my children's
education will be severely impeded because of this blatant waste of taxpayers'
money. 

 N.D. BYFIELD,
Lockridge. Gold in Australian Nugget all ours  

 STATEMENTS made in the article in the Sunday Times of November 23 that
gold used in the production of the Australian Nugget gold coins originates
from South Africa and Russia cannot pass uncorrected.
  The Australian Nugget gold coins are being produced from Australian gold.
  GoldCorp Australia borrows gold under commercial arrangements with the
Reserve Bank of Australia for the  gold required in each stage of gold
processing and coin production.
  As The Australian Nugget gold coins are sold, Australian gold is purchased
from institutions in Australia to replenish stocks.
  No gold from Zimbabwe is being used to produce The Australian Nugget.
Arrangements were made by the Perth Mint at the outset to ensure gold from
Zimbabwe is refined separately.
  Contrary to the claims of Mr Lightfoot, no South African gold is being
used to produce The Australian Nugget gold coins. No Russian gold is being
used to produce The Australian Nugget gold coins.
  We do not need other countries' gold to produce The Australian Nugget.
Australia is the fastest growing gold producer in the world.

 MICHAEL NAYLOR,
Deputy Chief Executive,
GoldCorp Australia.  

