Bigger penalties won't stop problem drinkers  

  LATELY there have been suggestions there should be heavier penalties for
offenders under the influence of alcohol.
  The criminal law is, generally speaking, concerned with voluntary and
intentional acts, and this is why it does not punish infants and those
suffering from mental incapacity. Alcoholics under the influence of alcohol
fit well into this classification.
  To simply punish alcoholics for their anti-social acts is an expensive
exercise in futility. For unless treated, they will continue to offend.
  Diversion of such a person into treatment is the practical way of insuring
that they will not continue to be public nuisances. It's the only possible
step that courts can take to make them useful and productive members of
society.

  I fully support the view that offenders, who do not accept treatment or
after treatment have lapsed into their old ways, should be treated as totally
responsible for their actions and should be punished for what they are,
selfish and anti-social.

 KEN ASHTON,
Administrator, Serenity 
Lodge, Rockingham. Snakes are people, too!  

  I WAS appalled to read (ST, Nov 2) the way in which a poor snake was
destroyed. I do however, commend Mr McKeekin for his efforts to obtain help.
  Had we been contacted, the reptile would have been removed alive with
the minimum of fuss. Once again, we see man, through ignorance and fear,
become the predator and the snake the unfortunate victim.
  All I ask is that the public get to know the characteristics and habits
of these reptiles and I can assure you fear will be overcome. You don't
have to kill them. Leave them alone and they will move on. They are not
villains.
  An amendment on the number of venomous reptiles found in WA - five of
the larger species of land snake are considered dangerous to man, not 47.
  We already have people killing indiscriminately, harmful and harmless
reptiles. We do not have any venomous lizards in Australia.

 Mrs S. GAIKHORST, High Wycombe. Trapping is threat to our rare birds  

  IT seems Mr Nelson and his friends (ST, Oct 26) have very little idea of
how delicate the ecological balance is and how quickly a species can be
wiped out.
  Some Australian birds are already extinct and many others are endangered
species partly because their habitats are within confined areas. Parrots,
such as our "white tailed black cockatoos" can be found only in the South-West
of WA and although they may appear to be "plentiful" to us, the few flocks
we have are all that can be found in the whole world.
  Australian birds fetch a good price overseas only because they are protected.
  I am not against earning the export dollar and letting others share our
rich heritage. But let those who wish to export breed their own stock and
let there be strict Government controls in this regard.

 B. SARALAM,
Booragoon Parents want sporting chance  

  REGARDING your article: "Crisis over sexes in sport" (ST. Oct 26): The
policy of gradually introducing integration in sport at primary schools
still stands, regardless of the wishes of parents and children.
  The schools in our area followed the recommendations in the guidelines
by introducing integration for running events at the recent interschool
sports. The parents and children at our schools and we believe, at Central
Busselton Primary School, did not want this.
  Our efforts, through the Education Department, to prevent the implementation
of this policy into our school system, were blocked by the Equal Opportunity
and Sex Discrimination Act. Our regional director stated in his letter to
us "neither the schools nor the Education Department can amend the Acts,
which are matters of parliamentary decision".
  The parents of our school  want our children to have the opportunity to
experience both integrated and segregated sport in the future.

 BEVERLEY J. STEFANOU,
West Busselton Parents and 
Citizens' Association. It's enough to make you mental  

  THE psychiatrists have done it again with another first for mankind.
  If we are going to label premenstrual tension as a mental disease (ST,
Oct 26) we might as well go ahead and label drunkenness as a form of insanity
(some grounds for that, actually) or even invent a name for the grumpiness
or unhappiness which follows exhaustion.
  We could go further than this and label all sorts of personality traits
- such as haughtiness or even chronic happiness - and then have a plethora
of mental illnesses that we could use for all occasions.

 HENRY BARTNIK,
Lathlain. Give our youth a reason to live  

  "WHY live?" This appears to be a question hundreds of young Australians
are asking themselves every day, and when we look at the suicide statistics,
one can't help but wonder whether they are finding any answers at all.
  Statistics show that our under 25s have one of the highest self-inflicted
death rates in the world. We also know that 100 people today all over Australia
will attempt to take their lives. Pretty haunting figures, don't you think?
  Maybe as a nation we should be asking ourselves the question "why is
it that young people in our country seem to have no meaning in life?" Why
is it that so many of Australia's future generation are frustrated with
life if this is supposed to be the "Lucky Country"?
  Could it be that as a community we are not providing space for the younger
generation? Is their search for meaning, futile because they are aliens
within our society? Could this also be the reason for such a high incidence
of drug addiction and alcoholism among the young? Could it be that our youth
are feeling the need to "escape" from feelings of alienation and lack of
significance?
  These questions send shivers down my spine. It compels me to ask "what
am I doing to help the youth of Australia?" Maybe as a whole nation we should
be addressing this question more deeply.

