YOUR LINE
Blocked accounts better  

The Chinese national Peoples' Congress, held in Beijing in March and April
this year, was addressed by Premier Thao Zijand on behalf of the State Council
covering a report on their Five Year Plan. The report quoted China's output
of grain for 1985 reached a total of 370 million tonnes, an increase of 58
million tonnes over  previous years. The Chinese Premier said that China
is now more than self-sufficient in grain and has a surplus for export.
  So, who is kidding whom amongst our politicians regarding subsidised wheat
sales (subsidised by taxpayers - not by the large grain companies who make
billions every year out of wheat sales to China and Russia. Yet, we still
hear the Right and the Left claim that Capitalism and Communism are inveterate
opponents) to China. It is about time that we acknowledge the unconscionable
fact that international trade benefits no one except the multi-nationals
and international financiers. If international trade is deemed necessary,
then it should be undertaken on the basis of "blocked accounts." "Blocked
accounts" are a bilateral method of exchanging goods between nations without
the aid of international finance. "Blocked accounts" would not only obviate
the onerous necessity of international debt (caused by developed countries
all trying to achieve a favourable balance of trade) but would dispense
with the utter absurdity of dumping (invariably below cost) goods in communist
countries whilst concurrently expending billions on nuclear arsenals against
the very enemy with whom we aid by exporting subsidised primary and secondary
products.

 J.D. HUME,
Lindisfarne. We wouldn't really miss Miss, Mrs or Ms  

Non-sexist language is needed to prevent us associating every position
or activity with a person's sex. Perhaps even more important than non-sexist
job descriptions is the need for non-sexist titles and pronouns. Can somebody
invent simple, non-sexist words that mean:
(a) Mr, Mrs, Miss or Ms;
(b) He or she;
(c) His or her(s);
(d) Him or Her?
Nothing ponderous please. Some of the expressions in the recently released
US Guide to Non-sexist Language make me cringe. Phrases such as "craftsperson"
and "wait person" forget that effective language requires simplicity. We
should be reaching for simple alternatives eg "waiter" instead of "waitress"
not "wait person".
  Of course, we would still be faced with thousands of individual names
that draw attention to sex eg Nathan, Natalie, George and Mary. Any
suggestions?

 DAVID BREWER.
Glebe. Specialised timbers are being destroyed  

I am a craftsman in wood and earn my living, along with hundreds of others
in this state, whether they be woodturners, furniture makers, tourist shop
proprietors, small sawmillers, timber merchants, art college lecturers,
etc, from the specialised timbers that are available to Tasmania.
  These specialised timbers are called minor species by the woodchip companies
and left on the ground and burned to provide a seed bed when they clearfell
and slashburn our forests.
  Do you realise Mr Gray, that you are currently permitting, one might even say
encouraging, the destruction of the resource base of what is a very important
industry for Tasmania? An industry that properly nurtured and 
developed could provide thousands of jobs throughout the state and bring 
Tasmania the reputation of a high quality manufacturer of specialised woodware.

 ANTONY DE LARA.
Moonah. The percentages were absolutely pointless  

We read with interest the article (Sunday Tasmanian, Sep 7) on cooking
with bean curd, of Tofu, but I would take issue with Sue Waterworth when
she states "It provides... 300% less cholesterol (than mince). If a quantity
of mince contained say, 10 grams of cholesterol, then 100% less of 10 grams
would be nil. Therefore it would be impossible to arrive at a 300% figure.
She had already said that Tofu has no cholesterol at all, so why not just
leave it at that, instead of going into pointless percentages?

 P.BROWN
Blackmans Bay. 

