YOUR LINE
Auction company clarifies position  

IN reference to your article in The Sunday Tasmanian (16-11-86) "Woods full
of fake Forrests", I am writing to clarify the comment made by Mr Hurst,
"I haven been to auctions where out of five Forrests for sale three were
forgeries".

  Our firm, Andrew Wright Auctions Statewide, conducts more auctions of
fine art than any other firm in this State. In a period from August 7, 1986,
to September 20, 1986, it auctioned some 16 paintings signed by Captain
Haughton Forrest, 14 of which were sold. We took the precaution (as always)
of having an expert authenticate these paintings and in this case it was
Mr Hurst. There was one other painting which was unsigned but Mr Hurst
attributed this to Captain Haughton Forrest and it also sold.

  This amount of Forrest paintings being instructed to one firm to auction
in such a short period of time is unprecedented in this State as only a
handful have turned up at auction all round the State in recent years. Through
this and the three major art auctions our firm has conducted in Hobart and
Launceston this year we have developed a reputation for being the "firm
that auctions all the Haughton Forrest paintings."
  Prospective purchasers know they can bid and buy with confidence as our firm
also allows a two-week period for return of forgeries. In cases when we
 discover a forgery before auction, the particular painting is returned
to the owner immediately and it will not be offered for auction under any
circumstances. This is why people have confidence to both buy and sell
through our firm. The excellent reputation we have developed and enjoy
Australia wide is of the utmost importance to me.
Like Mr Hurst, our firm is certainly aware of the problems associated with
forgeries and we take every possible step to avoid auctioning one. The prices
we have achieved for Forrest paintings led the way at auction in Australia
and if anyone had been under the misapprehension Mr Hurst was referring
to our firm in his comments, I am certain I have clarified this.

 ANDREW WRIGHT, General Manager,
Andrew Wright Auctions 
Statewide. Article `surprising'  

MY attention has been drawn to Ian Colvin's article Festival of Fine Films
(The Sunday Tasmanian 9-11-86) in which he states "it is good to see one
cinema chain making the effort to bring a selection of `arthouse' films
for the more discerning cinema goer".
  While applauding and supporting the festival members of the Hobart Film
Society would read Mr Colvin's statement with some surprise.
  The Hobart Film Society has been presenting monthly public screenings
of first release quality films from all over the world to Hobart audiences
since the early 1950s. In recent years it has also organised the annual
Hobart International Film Festival - the 18th festival has just ended -
and provided over 50 programmes each year for its members.
  With over 1300 members the society is by far the largest community-based
film society in Australia. Its initiatives during the past 40 years have
contributed much to the cultural life of Hobart and helped to build an
appreciative and supportive audience for "arthouse" films.
  On behalf of present and past members of the society, I extend an
invitation to Mr Colvin to join us and experience the excitement and
stimulation of quality cinema every week!

 PAUL BYWATER
PRESIDENT HOBART FILM SOCIETY
HOBART  

- While appreciating Mr Bywater's comments, the quote highlighted from
the original article explains that I was talking about the cinema chains
- that is, Hoyts and Village West End - and not smaller organisations such
as the Hobart Film Society and the State Cinema which continue to bring
quality films to Hobart

 - IAN COLVIN SOB report denied  

THE article "What, no organ grinders?" (Sunday Tasmanian 23-11-86), written
by Sandy Onslow-Browne, implies that the Commonwealth Grants Commission
was unimpressed with the way in which evidence was presented to it by public
officials during its visit to Tasmania last week.
  I would like to place on record a categorical denial of the inference
contained in the article that this commission was in any way dissatisfied
with the manner in which arrangements were made for the commission's visit
to Tasmania. Your correspondent, Mr Onslow-Browne, is clearly unaware that
no less than seven heads of Tasmanian Government departments presented
evidence to and briefed the commission during a general session conducted
in the conference room of the Land Department building at the commencement
of the inspections on Monday, November 17.
  During the course of the inspections in the ensuing week, the commission
was accompanied by the under treasurer and his senior colleagues, the
Director-General of Education, the Commissioner of Police and the Director
of Hospital and Medical Services within the Health Department. Senior personnel
from other departments joined the commission at relevant points for varying
periods during the programme.

