<subsample>
	<id> B27b </id>
	


	<source>The Weekly Times - 23 July 1986 </source>
	


	<h> New fighting fund gives the farmers lot of punch </h>
	


	<bl> Canberra Comment
By David Kidd </bl>
	

CANBERRA:  In three short years, the Hawke Government has managed to unite
farmers in a way which has not been achieved before, as shown by the broad
national support given to the Australian farmers' fighting fund, now expected
to reach $15 million. 
  The fund will bankroll legal challenges to Government legislation. It
will also be used to take militant trade unions to court when they move
outside the law.
  In the words of NFF president Ian McLachlan, the main use of the fighting
fund in year one will be for what he calls clearing Australia's industrial
passage ways.
  But there will be an early move to develop profiles of all federal rural
electorates, as well as country-city marginal seats.
  The profiles will cover the demographic and psychographic aspects of each
electorate.
  When the NFF conducted its recent animal welfare survey, one of the features
was the collation of the responses on animal welfare, against the
psychographic aspects of where people lived, how old they were, whether
married or single, if they worked or were on the dole and what their incomes
were.

  THE exercise was instructive with clear patterns in responses related
to life styles.
  In the lead up to the next federal election, profiles in hand, the NFF
will be able to plan its strategies to make sure that people understand
the issues and if possible ensure candidates are chosen sympathetic to NFF
and small business economic imperatives. 
  Just over a year ago the fighting fund was born at the farmers' rally
in front of Parliament House in Canberra in a display of unity which should
have alerted the Government that all was not well.
  While there was deep anger in the farm community then, the sector had
few means by which it could back its words with actions.
  But from now on it will be actions which speak the loudest.
  At the Canberra rally in a display of political independence Ian McLachlan
accused the leaders of the three major parties of being out of touch with
rural problems. This led to a furious reaction from the National Party leader,
Ian Sinclair.
  This public rift broke the perceived nexus between the NP and NFF which
the federation had been trying for years to break.
  
  THE success of the fighting fund was largely due to the perception that
Labor is a city-based party which has no interest in the problems in the
bush. This view helped to galvanise its large electorate to boost the NFF,
which was already well organised, vocal, and effective, into a now well
funded opponent for this Government, and all others which follow, no matter
what their political persuasions.
  The unity between farmers and business has resulted in a war chest for
the NFF, which will use the $2 million annual interest from the fund at
the discretion of trustees.
  The trustees are the former Premier of Western Australia, Sir Charles
Court; the fighting fund director and prominent Adelaide businessman Tony
Summers; National Farmers Federation president, Ian McLachlan; and NFF
executive director Andrew Robb.
  While the Minister for Primary Industry John Kerin understands the problems
in rural Australia, the majority of his colleagues do not apparently appreciate
the devastation there caused by the combination of rising costs, the drop
in the value of farm commodities and the use of monetary policies which
forced interest rates to an intolerable level.

  FARMERS in the Victorian Mallee were generous contributors to the $1.5
million raised in Victoria, despite recent tough times. Peter Fischer, the
National Party member for Mallee, told this Column that since July 1 this
year never had so many constituents turned up at his electoral offices and
at other meetings he arranged in the electorate, just to talk. Nor had he
seen them so confused over things like the fringe benefits tax (FBT).
  He summed up their feelings, when he said they believed that starting
with the assets test on pensions, the FBT and the capital gains tax, coupled
with high interest and inflation rates, all the Government had achieved
was to erode their capital base, and they did not like it one little bit.
  The mere threat of a capital gains tax was sufficient to force down the
value of farm land significantly, in some cases resulting in demands from
lending institutions to reduce overdrafts because of reduced equity in
the security.
  While all this adverse comment was getting wide currency, the Government
failed to successfully communicate to the rural electorate the positive
aspects of its policies such as the improved competitiveness for farm
commodities overseas, resulting from the massive devaluation of the Australian
dollar.

  THIS was acknowledged last week by the chairman of the Prime Minister's
rural task force, Barry Cunningham.
  The task force has not been a major public relations success for the
Government, judging by the reception it got in its recent swing through
central Victoria.
  Mr Cunningham admits to a particularly tough time in Mr Fisher's electorate
when the task force visited St Arnaud, where it was subjected to a tirade
of criticism.
  The Government at this stage is not acknowledging that it is in trouble
in the rural seats it holds. 
  But a measure of its concern was the outburst by national ALP secretary
Bob McMullan, who last week called on the NFF to return any overseas
contributions to the fighting fund and added that he was worried about what
the federation would do with all the money.


</subsample>
