Disastrous end to the nuclear dream The Worst Accident in the World - Chernobyl:
The End of the Nuclear Dream. Pan Books. RRP $8.95.Reviewed by COL MACKAY.  

  BEFORE going on night duty at Chernobyl's No.4 nuclear reactor on April
25 this year, Valeriy Hodiemchuk, later described simply as a "power station
operator", told his wife he would take her and their small son to the next
village for the weekend where they could help his mother plant potatoes.
  It was the last time the family saw him. In the early hours of Friday,
April 26, Hodiemchuk became a bizarre victim of what is now termed "the
worst accident in the world".
  Hodiemchuk's wife and child did make the trip on a bus just as planned,
with the little boy believing his father was still on duty at the plant.
  But in the aftermath of the explosion that tore the reactor apart, rescuers
who found Hodiemchuk's radiation-contaminated body had hastily covered it
with wet cement and abandoned it where it lay inside what was left of the
plant.
  The huge concrete sarcophagus now being built over the No.4 reactor will
make an awesome tombstone for his son to visit: as it will too, for his
own children and his children's children in turn - on through the centuries
it will take for Hodiemchuk's grave to become safe from radio-active
contamination.  
  Hodiemchuk was the first victim of the Chernobyl disaster. He was pinned
beneath collapsing masonry at his work station by the explosion. Nearby
his fellow worker and friend, Vladimir Sashionok, was also caught in the
blast.
  Staggering from the wrecked block with 80 per cent burns to his body,
Sashionok fell into the arms of horrified workmates and gasped only two
words: "Valeriy. Inside." He then lost consciousness and later died in an
ambulance on the way to hospital.
  Sashionok also did not have a funeral. Fearing radioactive contamination,
the ambulance crew buried him in the cemetery of the first village they came
to.

   Future in doubt  

  In a new book outlining the events that led to the disaster and its
aftermath, Chernobyl: The End of the Nuclear Dream, a team of special writers
from the London Observer strongly question the use and future of nuclear
power stations in present and future civilisation.
  They say scientists now know what caused the Chernobyl fire, but how could
it have been allowed to happen? Why could the Russian scientists not have
foreseen the disaster. And why did the safety systems that had been
deliberately built into the reactor not function? In particular, why did
the reactor's emergency cooling systems not immediately dampen down the blaze?
  But of the effects of the disaster, the authors say that even though Russian
official information places the death toll from the Chernobyl disaster at
just over 100, thousands more of the survivors will die of cancer over the next
few decades, and many more of their children and children's children may suffer
from genetic diseases.
  Tens of thousands may not be able to return to their contaminated homes
in the Ukraine, where Chernobyl is situated, for years to come. But, say
the authors, even these appalling consequences could have been infinitely
worse.
  They point out that if it had not been for five simultaneously lucky factors,
the Chernobyl accident could have been a holocaust. The death toll would
have been very much higher; the contamination very much greater.
  The first of these factors was that the accident happened at night. This
meant there were many fewer people at the site than there would have been
during the day, a few hundred compared with the several thousand employed
at the four existing reactors and on the construction of two others.
  More importantly, the people in the towns and countryside around the plant
were indoors. In their homes, they got one-tenth the radiation dose they
would have received outside. 
  The second factor was the fierceness of the graphite fire. Its intense
heat launched radioactive materials 1000m into the sky, as if they were
sleeved in an invisible chimney. This caused most of the radioactivity to
be widely dispersed on the winds, rather than falling on the surrounding
area.
  The longer it stayed in the air, the more the cloud's short-lived
radionuclides decayed and the less virulent they became. The weather was
responsible for the three other factors of good fortune.
  
   Crippling accidents  

  The night was still enough to allow the radioactive plume to rise steadily
far into the air. Also, what wind there was blew from the south, sending
the deadly cloud over the relatively sparsely populated Pripet marshes and
forest land.
  Most important of all, the weather at the time was dry: there was no rain
to bring down the radioactive materials.
  The authors point out that in the wake of the Chernobyl disaster, the
world's nuclear industry faces a crisis of confidence. As worried populations
throughout both eastern and western Europe listened anxiously to radio
and television advice about how to avoid the worst effects of the cloud
of radioactivity which swept over them from Chernobyl, it also brought anxiety
to the world's nuclear salesmen.
  Ask the authors: "Can nuclear power survive? Does it deserve to? And if
the world is to manage without nuclear power, what other sources can provide
the electricity to keep the lights burning into the 21st century?"
  Cynically, they point out that the nuclear industry and its powerful
supporters in government would say such questions could only could
only be asked by the technically illiterate or those blinded by 
environmentalism and hatred for high technology.
  Such technological arrogance, the authors say, has been bred by a generation
in which nuclear power has been isolated from real public pressure, and
has developed in a close and unhealthy symbiosis with central government.
  They say for 40 years nuclear power has been shamelessly pampered by
governments of every color in almost every developed country. It has been
given the best brains and biggest budgets governments could provide.
  The laws of economics have been repealed in its favor, while its
environmental hazards have been overlooked. Only the defence industries
have enjoyed a longer or more luxurious ride. Yet at the end of this, the
industry in most of the western world is unprofitable, depressed and
demoralised.

