IT'S ALL FUN FOR MOUCHE Movie Talk BY JOHN HANRAHAN   

THERE can't be many stars who could claim their break into show business
was in Tahiti!
  But that's exactly where 14-year-old Mouche Phillips, one of the stars
of TV's Butterfly Island and the new Aussie movie Playing Beatie Bow stepped
into the spotlight.
  Mouche plays the title role in the film adaptation of Ruth Park's bestseller
about a Sydney teenager who finds herself transported back to the Rocks
area in the last century by a young girl (Mouche), and the adventures she
encounters.
  "A big singer by the name of Carlos, from France, came over to Tahiti
to do a commercial for an orange juice," Mouche, an enthusiastic, poised
and unaffected young lady recounted.
  "They got all the Tahitian girls around my age but then said they were
looking for someone different to be in it ...You! And I went, `oh, okay'.
  "That was my first film experience."
  She had been living in Tahiti for a year and half with her mother.
  On returning to Sydney, a friend suggested Mouche accompany her to join
an agency.
  "I went along and wasn't actually going to join," Mouche explained.
  "But she got some photos done and I jumped into a couple of them and the
agency asked me to join, too.
  "Television commercials and catwalk modeling followed, but I was only
10 at the time and my idea of a career was either an air hostess or a
ballerina.  
  Then came the chance of a lifetime. She was invited to join a number of
boys and girls to take part in an exchange with children her age in China, with
the exercise to be subject of a documentary.
  "It was called Children of Two Countries ... there were four boys and
four girls with special talents, and it was to experience their kind of
life. I went for painting," she recalled.
  They spent three weeks there. Then came Butterfly Island.
  "I had long hair and a sun tan and they thought I looked right for an island
setting," she said.
  "But they wanted to know if I could do all these sporty things like drive
a boat and hang from a coconut tree ... I said, `oh sure, whatever you want'.
And they wanted me to climb into a plane from a boat as it was flying off.
I went off to Queensland for it and had great fun.
  "The role of Beatie Bow, a young candymaker's daughter, was a cinch after
that."
  Then came the worst news. She had to have her waist length hair cut off.
  "I thought they were joking, but they weren't. Mum asked for a wig and
they said no. But now I like it this length! And I loved the role because
it was a challenge."
  But as much fun as Mouche is having with her acting, she has other plans
within the industry.
  "I really want to do make-up, special effects make-up, and then eventually
do some producing. And Mum is very supportive of me," she enthused.

