RUDOLPH'S TROUBLE IN MIND MOVIE TALK BY JOHN HANRAHAN  

ALAN RUDOLPH wanted to update some of the old hard-boiled 40s and 50s
detective stories. 
  But it took a certain disenchantment with Hollywood plus domination and
interference from the big studios to push him into doing it.
  The result, from the maker of Welcome To L.A. and Choose Me, is Trouble
In Mind which stars Kris Kristofferson, Keith Carradine, Lori Singer, Genevieve
Bujold and Divine.
  And for Rudolph, a fruitful and important friendship with singer and
songwriter Kristofferson.
  Trouble In Mind is an offbeat story about a cop who's served time for
murder and the strange array of characters he becomes involved with when
he returns to the fictional Rain City hangouts he once haunted.
  As a film-maker Rudolph had always been an outsider. But the success of
his films drew attention and job offers.
  They taught him the pricelessness of independence: of almost total control
over his films.
  "I wrote this story when I was editing another film," he said.
  "I wanted an original screenplay at the time because I was finishing
Songwriter, with Kris Kristofferson, for somebody else," Rudolph explained
diplomatically.
  "I would go and write `Trouble' just as a relief.  "I knew I wanted to
do an updating of those old, wonderfully hard-boiled movies that were made
in the 40s and 50s ...
  "When I got into it I realised they had no reality other than their own
and they really weren't like any elements in our own lives.
  "So I knew this was going to be a highly fictional film and that made
me enjoy it more.
  "With Choose Me, I wasn't really writing out of any kind of personal
experience, I was writing objectively and had fun with it."
  Rudolph's second film, Remember My Name, with Tony Perkins and Geraldine
Chaplin, also helped to inspire the making of Trouble In Mind.
  "It was about a woman  who got out of prison who came back to find her
ex-husband. And at the time I'd wanted to write the story of a guy getting
out of prison, and I thought it was too dead-on." Rudolph explained.
  "So this is kind of my pass at the male anti-hero part."
  And, of course he had just worked with Kristofferson.
  "There is something so legendary about the guy that I started thinking
about him before I wrote.
  "I knew that Hawke had to have certain larger-than-life qualities and
persona."
  Hawke , he added, is "a guy who is separate from the pack and who goes
through life being a stranger and having a very rich interior life, but
is really separated from groups of people when he's around, and sort of
uncomfortable with, people.
  "Kris is not all like that, but he has enough of that for the character
to work."

