<subsample>
	<id> C06a </id>
	


	<source> The Age - 18 November 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> The surprise is at the beginning </h>
	


	<h> FILMS </h>
	


	<bl> NEIL JILLET </bl>
	

  PLEASE don't give away the surprise beginning! In the opening scenes of
`Wetherby' (Rivoli, Camberwell Junction) Jean, a middle-aged English teacher,
is having a dinner party for a few friends in her Yorkshire Cottage. It is an
enjoyable, argumentative, boozy occasion. And one of the guests, Morgan, turns
out to be a complete stranger to the hostess and everyone else. 
  The next day Morgan returns to Jean's house and - this is where details
should not be revealed - does something shockingly violent.
  What follows is a combination of an entertaining rerun of `Plenty' and
a detective story (why did Morgan do what he did and why did he involve
Jean?). `Plenty', a US film directed by Australian Fred Schepisi, was an
adaptation by British writer David Hare of his own stage play. `Wetherby'
is a British film with an original script by Hare. It also marks his debut
as a feature film director.
  `Plenty' was very much a vehicle in which Meryl Streep displayed her
ability to imitate yet another accent (this time upper-crust English) and
to be fascinatingly neurotic. It was also a whingeing piece about Britain's
post-World War II failure to become the New Jerusalem of the socialist
dreamtime. It made valid complaints in a tiresomely repetitive way.
  `Wetherby' is very much an expression of Hare's hatred of post-Atlee
Britain. At times this hatred is too directly expressed (as in the tirade
to camera that one character launches against Mrs Thatcher); but for the
most part it is subtly expressed, notably in a scene where a restless pupil
traps Jean into supporting political and social attitudes that she believed
were contrary to her philosophy.
  The chief interest of `Wetherby', though, is in its form rather than
its content. Hare explores his themes of disenchantment, loneliness and
betrayal by constantly taking us back - in weeks to Morgan's obsessive
pursuit of a fellow-student and in years to Jean's adolescent affair with
an airman conscripted for service in the Malayan emergency. The handling
of these flashbacks is faultless in its intricacy and clarity and compensates
for the slimness of the plot and the lack of novelty in the political analysis.
  Despite some arch staginess in the writing, the actors do a fine job as
soloists and in ensemble. Vanessa Redgrave (Jean) is in top form as a woman
gradually forced into an awareness of her loneliness and inadequacies. The
young Jean is convincingly played by Redgrave's daughter, Joely Richardson:
we are given simultaneously a reminder of what Redgrave was like and an
explanation of how Jean's character is shaped.
  My only serious reservation about this film is the soupy music - Hollywood
mock-Rachmaninov from the 1940s - that kept making me feel Hare was making
a joke I didn't get.

  LOOKING like a sick spaniel and sounding like a Carlton greengrocer, Tom
Conti oozes through `Saving Grace' (Australia) as the fictional Pope Leo
XIV, who does a Haroun al Rashid and wanders out of Vatican City to see
how the people are getting on. He ends up in a village in southern Italy
and teaches its impoverished inhabitants the dignity of labor.
  This piece of sanctimonious drivel is so soggy that I suspect it has been
sponsored, as is the papal fashion these days, by a brewery. The vague
credits suggest it is a US-UK-Italian coproduction. The film never touches
on any of the issues that one assumes concern contemporary popes, but there
is an unresolved scene where a violent act by Leo is followed by a murder.
Apart from this brief excursion into action, `Saving Grace' is directed with
remorselessly slow solemnity by Robert M. Young from a grovelling script
by David Ward.
  THE coldly beautiful Catherine Deneuve is the classiest grande dame of
French cinema, and Christopher Lambert is adequate as a Gallic macho man,
best-known for swinging on a vine (`Greystoke') or wielding a broadsword
(`Highlander'). Now the iceberg and Tarzan have been oddly coupled with
non-combustible results in `Paroles et Musique' (Russell).
  At the start of the film (English title `Love Songs') Margaux (Deneuve),
who is a workaholic executive in the music industry, and her two small
children have been abandoned by her American husband. Finding Paris too
distracting as a place in which to write his Great Book, he has fled to
the calm of New York. Meanwhile, Jeremy (Lambert) and his mate Michel (Richard
Anconina) are trying to turn themselves from waiters into rock singers.
Margaux and Jeremy begin an affair which threatens to foul up his career
and his friendship with Michel, and destroy any chance of saving her marriage.
  Writer-director Elie Chouraqui tried to make three films here and ended
up with one bland bundle. As a musical, `Paroles et Musique' is clogged
with big doses of unexciting rock (not so much soft as mushy ). As a romance,
it suffers from the lack of chemistry between the lovers and from a failure
to explore their characters or their relationship. As a study of male
friendship, the film does slightly better, thanks mainly to Anconina, who
is loaded with charm and promise. If he had been paired with Deneuve, `Paroles
et Musique' might have had some slight entertainment value.
                               

</subsample>
