Two Thai the knot in comedy VIDEO David Pougher  

  TOM Hanks and John Candy made a good team in Splash and the partnership
works well again in Volunteers, a lively story about a Peace Corps misfit
in Thailand during the early 1960s.
  Hank plays a playboy snob who escapes to Thailand just ahead of some very
ugly creditors who want to separate him from his kneecaps.
  Appeals to his fabulously wealthy father for help from Bangkok only result
in him being drafted into the Peace Corps, the cheery doers-of-good-deeds
in Third World countries.
  He and Candy, who plays a brainwashed and boring engineer, end up teaching
the villagers a few things not on the Corps program but predictably, finding
some humility along the way. Generally good fun, from Cannon.

  MORE comedy - but of a different nature - comes from the excellent Spinal
Tap, a satirical "documentary" of a British group on tour in the U.S.
  The boys, who have lost a couple of drummers through spontaneous combustion,
are on the decline after reaching their peak in the days of flower power.
  Nowadays they hardly get any pleasure out of smashing up hotel rooms,
even though they have gone "heavy metal".
  The "insights" into life on the road are hilarious because we've seen
them all before from earnest rockers who "just want to reach the kids through
my music, y'know?" Great entertainment, from CEL.

  WHOEVER  came up with the idea for the comedy vampire film Once Bitten
had a very close look at Love at First Bite, the George Hamilton horror
spoof.
  In Once Bitten, the roles are simply reversed. "Dracula" is a she, in
the rather raddled form of Lauren Hutton, on the lookout for a male virgin
to preserve her eternal youth. There are a few good lines but this is
undemanding stuff, useful for whiling away a couple of hours. Out from
Seven Keys.

  NOT so undemanding is Slaughterhouse 5 (CIC-Taft), adapted from Kurt 
Vonnegut's anti-war novel.
  The book was complicated enough - is its hero, Billy Pilgrim, insane or
is he really time-jumping between the present, World War 2 and another planet?
  The film makes a brave effort to translate Vonnegut's ideas without any
great success. As an adaptation it's confused, as a film in its own right,
it's fairly tedious.
   
 