Personal triumph in Castlemaine for `diva' Drivala CONCERT JEREMY VINCENT CONCERT: Opera arias and duets sung by Jenny Drivala (soprano) and Keith
Lewis (tenor). With the Rantos Collegium conducted by Richard Divall.
VENUE: Castlemaine Town Hall.  

It's a long way from the leading opera houses of the world to the Castlemaine
Town Hall, but singers Jenny Drivala and Keith Lewis took it all in their
stride last Saturday to give an amazing display of vocal virtuosity which
had farmers and city slickers alike screaming for more.
  The friendly town hall acoustics of country Victoria must have been a
dream come true for the pair in their program of popular opera arias and
duets.
  The Victoria State Opera publicity machine had promised much from Jenny
Drivala and there is no doubting the ear-splitting power behind her top
notes, as I'm sure every resident of Castlemaine heard - even if the hall
wasn't filled to capacity. It should have been.
  What is even more amazing is her undeniable resemblance to Maria Callas.
She dresses, walks, stands, acts and most definitely at times sounds like
the great diva.
  Drivala's performance of Ah Fors'e Lui and its ensuing Sempre Libera from
Verdi's La Traviata at this concert can only be called a personal triumph.
  Like Callas in the role, the young soprano created a moving character,
deftly treading the vocal tightrope and stunning the audience with her
brilliant interpretation.
  Throughout the night, Drivala sang with almost total disregard for the
strain a heavy program such as this must impose on any singer.
  Elsewhere, Rossini's Bel Raggio exposed technical lapses in her young
voice and was perhaps an unfortunate opener, but better balance and confidence
developed - breathing settled and the harsh tone at the top was brought
under control.
  Keith Lewis has a stylish voice, richly produced for one so young, with
a purity of tone that's a first-rate lesson in vocal control for any singer.
For such a concert he does not display the acting element of his colleague,
but his is the better voice by virtue of his technique.  From among his selection came a superbly phrased performance of Lensky's
aria from Eugene Onegin sung in Russian, showing just why he is one of the
world's leading lyric tenors.
  Throughout the concert the Rantos Collegium was ever faithful to conductor
Richard Divall, revelling also in the close confines of the small hall.
As a starter, the overture to Mozart's The Abduction from the Seraglio was
a sparkling, zestfully played piece, with particular reference to the guidance
Divall gave the wind instruments and the cracking pace he gleaned from the
strings.
  This concert was part of the Castlemaine State Festival.
  Drivala, Lewis and Divall team up in the Victoria State Opera's production
of Bellini's I Puritani at the State Theatre from Thursday.
                               
