Everything you never wanted to know about the left hand Television By RONNIE GIBSON  

A PROGRAM titled Mysteries of the Left Hand, on Channel 7 tonight at 8.30,
sounded amusing enough.
  Would mollydookers finally get a fair go?
  Would there be jokes about buying left-handed shovels?
  No such luck.
  This BBC first-release documentary is most informative, but probably
the driest hour of television you'll see for a long time.
  It is more about genetics, research into dyslexia, the connection between
left-handed people and that reading disease, inherited allergies and speech
impediments.
  Neurologist Norman Geshwin, of Harvard University, is interviewed at great
length about his investigations and discoveries about left-handedness.
He does have some extraordinary pieces of information to offer but
unfortunately the program is presented in a rather flat manner.
  Did you know for example that someone with a trained eye could have spotted
that Leonardo da Vinci was left-handed? Apparently you could pick it from
the way he shaded his works with a paintbrush.
  According to Dr Geshwin, Thomas Edison had awful trouble learning to
read and Albert Einstein was very slow learning to speak.
  Woodrow Wilson, who became President of the United States during World
War I, didn't learn to read until he was nine.
  Rodin's bronze sculptures apparently inspired research into the artist's
physical make-up. He was dyslexic, which resulted in his endowing his nudes
with abnormal testicle arrangements. If this confuses you, you will have
to watch the show. All is explained by genetics and testosterone. 
 Other pieces of trivia to come to light are that King George VI, naturally
left-handed and a stutterer, was prevented from writing with his left hand
but allowed to wield a tennis racquet with it.
  And on the matter of tennis, Geshwin points to champions McEnroe,
Navratilova, Borg and Connors - all left-handers.
  Apparently, mollydookers have more spacial skills and understanding of
the three dimensions.
  Statistically, there are more than average lefthanders among architects
and mathematicians.
  There are more stutterers in West Africa than anywhere in the world, a
genetic factor that has to do with twinning. Twins, left-handedness and
stuttering are inter-connected.
  In Japan, however, twins are a rarity.
  More males than females are left-handed. Most of us have met an adult
man who stutters badly but few of us know a woman with the same impediment,
Geshwin says.
  Mysteries of the Left Hand is enlightening TV but should you miss it,
don't lose any sleep. Only an Einstein could remember the multitude of facts
and figures that roll off Geshwin's tongue.
  And anyway, a lot of it is useless information - unless you happen to
be a genetic engineer.

