Tough Rambo runs for cover From MICHAEL O'REGAN in New York  

A million Vietnamese bullets couldn't pierce that tough hide. Nor could
a thousand upper-cuts.
  But Sly Stallone, Hollywood's most successful, yet maligned superstar,
admits he's hurt and bewildered.
  He cannot understand why his films were met with such critical outrage
and anger.
  "It's as if it's open season on me," he said while on the set of his
latest film, Over The Top.
  "Maybe it's because of some of the things I said early on in my career.
  But Stallone said the backlash was a "very natural process" because of
his incredible success.

 Warned  

  "I was warned about it by my first acting coach ... I remember her saying:
`Don't stick your head above the crowd, because if you do, they're going
to be lining up to take it off'.
  "At that time, of course, I had no idea what she meant. But 15 years later,
I stuck my head up above the crowd and people lined up."
  Stallone also flexed his vocal muscles at those who took Rambo: First
Blood Part 2, too seriously.
  "What about after the girl dies, and all of a sudden there are eight
crack Viet Cong seasoned veterans and I stand up and z-z-z-z-z-z and they
stand there shooting. I mean, none of them, like, duck.
  "And I just take them all out in one second and then I shoot 300 yards
with a bow and arrow and, boom, hit the guy. Thank you very much."
  Stallone said he'd love to do another Rocky film, but not one movie goers
would like.
  What Stallone would really like to do with his oldest character is turn
him into a club fighter again.
  "And it seems to me after all those fights, he'd have to have incurred
some mental damage He'd be, you know, punchy," he said.
  "So I can envision him wanting to return to his old neighborhood. And
I can see him asking his wife, `Adrian, where's my  hat?', remember that old
hat he had? 
  "I have to think that, at the end, Rocky would be reduced to being a
professional greeter. And a sad case."
  But the fans, he said, just wouldn't allow such an ending for filmdom's
favorite pug.
                     
