`BROTHER TOM' MINI SERIES IS SPECIAL EVENT By TV WRITER PAUL WICKS  

  The show which may well be Channel O's biggest "special event" of the
year - the Australian mini series "My Brother Tom" - is still a few weeks
away.
  But TV Telegraph gained an exclusive preview of the show and it shows
great promise. While it was not a full-length preview the production quality
looks impressive.
  So does the acting line-up - led by Gordon Jackson and Keith Michell
as rivals.
  Jackson plays a knockabout Catholic character in a small town in the 1930s.
Michell is a straitlaced Protestant lawyer, who despises everything Jackson's
character stands for.
   The plot thickens further when Michell's son and Jackson's daughter fall
in love.
  Jackson also starred in a previous superb Australian mini series, "A
Town Like Alice".
  The new series won't have it all on its own. Both rival commercial channels
are soon to screen other major contenders for the Australian Mini Series
Of The Year award.
 
  Meanwhile, the ratings battle fires up on Sunday night with a big movie
clash at 8.30.
  It should be a two-way fight between Channel 7's "Splash" and Channel 9's 
"National Lampoon Vacation". Both are commercially appealing and basically fun 
viewing.
  Channel O has the best quality movie of the night - "Mrs Delafield Wants
To Marry" - in which Katharine Hepburn stars in a story of old love.
  However, it would be a big surprise if this telemovie outrated the other
two theatrical releases.

  The battle continues on Monday night with Channel 7 running another
potential big movie at 8.30, "Poltergeist".
  That night, Channel 9 stays with its usual fare, but Channel O begins
US mini series "Strong Medicine" about a woman's rise to power in a
pharmaceutical company. Pamela Sue Martin, Dick Van Dyke, Sam Neill and
Ben Cross head the cast. It's OK.
  Channel 2 also makes moves that night by beginning a new batch of Max
Gilies comedy-satire at 9.20 and then a new series of Clive James interviews
recorded in Sydney.
  His first guests are an odd couple - Ita Buttrose and the Queensland
Premier, Sir Joh Bjelke Petersen.  
  James conducts friendly little  chats with both, although he did ask Sir
Joh: "Are you a fascist dictator?
  But even that was handled with mirth. This was an easy questioning session
for Sir Joh.
  It makes moderately interesting viewing.
                 
