Alan Bond misses launch preview tv telegraph By PAUL WICKS  

  Alan Bond missed the launch this week of the TV series about his successful
bid in 1983 for the America's Cup. He was in New York.
  But his wife, Eileen, was at the Sydney Opera House for the launch of
"The Challenge".
  It was a cold, wet, misty day with a solitary 12m yacht - like those in
the real Cup - bobbing about in the harbor outside the preview room.  
  The six-hour show, to screen in a fortnight on Channel 9, has Mrs Bond's
approval.
  "It's pretty much spot on. I felt goose bumps watching it.
  "I think Alan will laugh a lot."
  But will he laugh at scenes in which his onscreen namesake (actor John
Wood) has some terse exchanges with designer Ben Lexcen (actor John Clayton).
  "Alan and Ben have been best friends for 30 years," she said.
  Eileen describes herself as the world's best America's Cup spectator.
"I've never missed a race in any of our challenges."
  She believes her husband will continue to compete in the Cup - regardless
of the outcome of January's defence. "I don't believe it will be his last.
He never waits for anything."
  Mrs Bond spent some time in Perth with actress Lorraine Bayly, who makes
a good go of portraying her on screen.
  Brisbane actor, Ray Barrett was enjoying the launch preview as he hadn't
previously seen any of the completed material.
  Barrett had reason to be in an excellent frame of mind. He had been driven
to the preview in a white Rolls-Royce - just the style for a chief of the
New York Yacht Club, his role in the show, complete with American accent.
  Barrett was particularly impressed by the authenticity of the scenes
of the yacht races. He is a yachtie himself.
  Many of the cast of this Australian mini were present, but the people
they portray were noticeably absent - obviously many are preparing for the
new challenge off Fremantle  John Wood, who plays Alan Bond, gave a standout performance.
  The screen John Bertrand, John Diedrich, wasn't there, but Nicholas Hammond,
who plays arch rival Dennis Conner, was.
  Hammond, a likeable American, could well emerge as one of the real stars
of a show not short on name and quality performers.
  English actor Tim Pigott-Smith looks sensational as the British syndicate
chief Peter de Savary, while former Coorparoo lad, Richard Moir, has the
pivotal role of Bond chief, Warren Jones.
  The $4.5 million show has obvious international appeal, with joint executive
producer, Greg Coote proudly announcing overseas sales.
  The story begins with Bond's unsuccessful 1980 attempt, but ends on a
high note with the success of his next bid.
  It is set to be one of the bigger series of the year.
  Channel 9 has to run it soon, as there remain only five more weeks of
ratings this year, and surveys don't resume until after the start of the
1987 Cup clash. The show could be well and truly out of date if left until
then.

