<subsample>
	<id> C12c </id>
	


	<source> Adelaide Advertiser - 1 August 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Exciting titles lead the charge </h>
	


	<h> VIDEO </h>
	


	<bl> with David Sly </bl>
	

  AFTER a lean month in July, video distribution companies are set to release
a big contingent of exciting new titles this month. Australian company
Roadshow has taken the initiative to lead the charge with a movie which
has not yet been released for a cinema version - The Clan Of The Cave Bear.
  Derived from the book Earth's Children by Jean M. Auel, the story looks
at the conflict between the primitive Neanderthal man and the emerging
Cro-Magnon human species at the dawn of modern man, about 35,000 years ago.
  Daryl Hannah (star of Splash) features in the lead as a young girl lost and
isolated from her tribe, one of the first groups of Cro-Magnon*Cro-Mangon
people. She is discovered by a nomadic Neanderthal tribe which reluctantly
decides to take in the peculiar stranger and raise her. 
  The clash between the two human species is emphasised by the struggles
she has trying to be accepted into the primitive tribe and conforming with
their customs.
  Although it is a very stark and testing movie - much of the dialogue is
a series of grunts, making every gesture and movement important to the story
- it is an intriguing and absorbing tale which should attract considerable
interest from people who appreciate pensive drama.

  Roadshow will also release its first major package of sell-through videos
to the public this month, having tested the water recently with the successful
sale of the sex education video Where Did I Come From?
  The new package consists of 13 titles which have been released previously
for rental on the Roadshow, Premiere and Disney video labels and will be
segregated into three price category*catagories.
  Recent blockbuster titles Rambo: First Blood Part II, The Woman In Red
and The Terminator will cost $24.95. The older collection of popular movies
including An American Werewolf In London, Gallipoli, First Blood, Country,
Lone Wolf McQuade, Class and Mad Max will be $19.95 each, and the Disney
titles Swiss Family Robinson, 20,000 Leagues Under The Sea and Dumbo will
be available for $29.95 each.
  The videos will be in local stores this month and will be promoted by an
extensive radio and television advertising campaign.
  
  A notable new release which is sure to generate great controversy in the
video marketplace is Hail Mary!, the bizarre modern interpretation of the
birth of Christ by Jean-Luc Godard which has drawn a savage reaction from
Christian groups.
  In a significant coup, the movie was secured for video release for the
Video Excellence company by Walter Lehne (previously with Video Classics)
before screening in cinemas around Australia.
  The R-rated title has been available to video stores for ordering during
the past two weeks and should be appearing in some rental outlets soon.
Because of the media storm which has surrounded this movie - attracting
such labels as &quot;blasphemous&quot;, &quot;obscene&quot; and &quot;indecent&quot; - it is certain this
title will be in big demand.

  To coincide with the announcement of his third World Safari adventure
and the release of his book, SA explorer and film-maker Alby Mangels has
released his World Safari II movie on video through Vestron Video.
  The exciting movie, which contains footage Mangels shot around the world
over six years, includes the trail of a massive Australian Outback cattle
muster, trekking through the highlands of Papua New Guinea and travels through
the jungles of South America.
  Accompanying Mangels on part of his journey to complete World Safari II
was Melbourne model Judy Green, who was seriously injured with Mangels in
a road accident in South America. Although the tone of the expedition was
soured by the accident, the movie was completed and classified a success
by film patrons. It attracted large audiences when Mangels toured around
the country two years ago, screening the movie in unorthodox venues including
church and community halls.
  With a reputation for producing basic but exciting adventure films, Mangels
should see World Safari II win wide acceptance on the video market.



	<h> Video Views </h>
	

Toy Soldiers (Palace): This film is the grouping of current B-grade movie
cliches - vigilante forces, partying US college kids and Central American
terrorist groups - into a story which at least tries to present everything
in a slightly different light.
  The tale involves a rich group of rather mature US college students who
borrow a luxury yacht from one girl's father to cruise the Central American
coastal waters under the watchful eye of an ex-Marine minder.
  After pulling a stunt which leaves the minder stranded in a dinghy, the
kids enjoy a lengthy party until one falls on deck and hits his head. They
anchor in an unfamiliar port and travel to a small village for medical help
but are set upon a ruthless group of guerilla warriors and held for ransom.
  One girl escapes back to America, forms a vigilante force and plots to
free her companions from the rebel camp when government negotiations over
the ransom become bogged down.
  As with a lot of small-budget movies released on video, the clever packaging
and promotion of the title is much more attractive than the movie itself.
Moderately entertaining but likely to disappoint some viewers.


</subsample>
