Top music and flash dancing ...  

  Channel 10's Wednesday night movie at 8.40, Flashdance, is a modern day
Cinderella.
  Jennifer Beals stars as Alex, an attractive, talented dancer, who finances her
dreams of becoming a member of the Pittsburgh Ballet Company by working as a
welder during the day. 
  During the night she works at the local bar parading her talents in front
of an intoxicated crowd.
  Alex falls in love with the owner of the construction company where she
works. Their relationship boosts Alex toward success.
  The highlight of the movie is the music and the spectacular dance scenes
which are the eighties answer to Saturday Night Fever, the hit of the
seventies.  Hit songs Maniac and What a Feeling! really add to the impact
of the movie and played a big part in its success.
  A familiar storyline of a rags to riches attempt is carried off very well
in Flashdance.
  It also stars Michael Nouri.

  THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN (Friday, 8.30, Channel 10) - While most of
us thrive on pushing a pen or swinging a pick, James Bond is back thriving
on adventure and always cheating death.
  Roger Moore is James Bond, 007, and someone has placed a high price on
his head. It is the dreaded Scaramanga (Christopher Lee). Bond heads east
to encounter his enemy in his usual action packed way.
  He is attacked by martial arts experts, sumo wrestlers and has a hair
raising boat chase. And in typical Bond fashion, the quality of his female
company is high.
  It is the ninth James Bond movie and is sure to please the many Bond
die-hards.  Stars Roger Moore, Christopher Lee and Britt Ekland.
 
  YOUNG DOCTORS IN LOVE (Tonight, 8.30, Channel 7) - Based on the same ideas
as the Carry On medical satires, it will provide viewers who have a sense
of the ridiculous with some very funny moments.
  A cast headed by old hand at the comedy game, Harry Dean Stanton, bungles
its way through a series of outrageous events which will leave you wondering
what really does happen when you are under anaesthetic.
  Produced by Garry Marshall, the man who gave us the Odd Couple and Happy
Days, Young Doctors In Love will provide light, humorous viewing. Stars
Harry Dean Stanton.
                         
