<subsample>
	<id> C14a </id>
	


	<source> The West Australian - 26 June 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Monteverdi chorus </h>
	


	<h> Music </h>
	


	<bl> by Derek Moore Morgan</bl>
	

  HAMBURG'S famous Monteverdi Choir makes its first Australian tour next
month, beginning with a single Perth concert on July 7 at the Concert Hall.
  Forty singers, together with their choir director, Jurgen Jurgens, will
display their talents in a wide-ranging programme of shorter choral items.
  The first part consists mainly of madrigals and chansons from the European
Renaissance period, balanced by a second half representing the 19th and
20th centuries, and including some of the Brahms Gipsy songs as well as
individual items by Dvorak and Tchaikovsky.
  Interesting sets of chansons by Debussy and Hindemith, as well as pieces
by Kodaly and Ligeti bring the programme close to our own time.
  The Monteverdi Choir was founded by Jurgen Jurgens just over 30 years ago,
originally as a small body concerning itself in the main with madrigal singing.
  The personnel soon consisted mainly of students and other young people,
who were eager to learn, and ambitious to improve.
  In 1956, after only a year of existence, they went to the international
choral competition in Arezzo, Italy, coming 24th. Each succeeding year they
improved their rating, and in 1959 their goal was achieved, with a first
prize in the main competition for mixed choirs.
  Many other prizes in international competitions followed and today the
Monteverdi Choir is known as Europe's major prizewinning amateur choral
body.
  Success in competitions attracted the attention of recording companies,
and records, many of which won international awards, established the choir's
reputation throughout the world.
  Flexible in size, the ensemble can consist of 20 to 90 singers, according
to the needs of anything from folk-song programmes to oratorio.
  Theirs is no specialised repertoire, and within a single programme they
move easily from the linear interplay of madrigals to the romantic richness
of Brahms, or the dissonant clarity of contemporary choral works. Singing
in seven languages is taken for granted by this ensemble.
 The music of Claudio Monteverdi, considered Italy's greatest 17th century
composer, is a starting point for the ensemble.
  Described by an immediate successor as &quot;the prophet of music&quot; because
of his innovatory spirit, Monteverdi's contribution to musical history
has been ranked even with that of Bach, Mozart and Beethoven.

  THE Eder Quartet visited Australia and New Zealand in 1980, though on
that occasion I believe it gave Perth a miss.
  Founded in 1972 at Budapest's famous Franz Liszt Academy of Music, its
principal teacher also coached the legendary Kodaly and Bartok Quartets.
  Major awards at Evian and Munich were followed by extensive European
tours, in addition to impressive appearances at international festivals.
  The Eder Quartet performs regularly on radio and television in its native
Hungary - in addition to appearances on the concert platform.
  Its recordings include the complete Bartok quartets, the sixth and last
of which, dating from 1939, it will play in its Musica Viva recital at the
Concert Hall on Monday, together with works by Brahms and Haydn.
   

</subsample>
