Sleuth lives on while actresses fade away  

  THE Super Sleuth, Jane Marple, never seems to fail to find her villain,
and an audience as well. Agatha Christie's classic creation weathers the
years with a style most of us envy.
  True, she has had many personae over the decades, but the character remains
fairly true to the one Agatha Christie, the writer who never went to school,
dreamed up.
  Christie began writing at the end of the Great War, with the little Belgian, 
Hercule Poirot, her main character. Miss Marple appeared later, in 1930.  
  Tonight Channel Seven has "Agatha Christie's A Murder is Announced" with Joan 
Hickson in the role of Miss Marple.
  She took the part for a series of four Agatha Christie telemovies, some
of which have been seen here. Remember the one with Bette Davis as the
potential victim?
  This one includes the very British talent of Ursula Howells, John Castle,
Andrew Cruickshank, Sylvia Syms and Michael Culver.
  Agatha Christie dreamt up some ingenious ways of doing away with the victims.
  Part of the fascination for many readers are the settings for these crimes.
  With some exceptions, they take place in quaint English villages and seaside
towns. The very unlikelihood of such places being centres of criminal passion
adds even more drama to the stories.
 Such settings also provide her with innumerable opportunities for her famous
red herring.
  Tonight, the residents of Chipping Cleghorn are fascinated to read an
advertisement for a murder in their local newspaper.
  The advertisement reads: "A murder is announced and will take place on
Friday, October 5 at Little Paddock, at 7pm. Friends please accept this,
the only invitation."
  The residents are, quite understandably, most fascinated by this and many
make it their business to be at Little Paddock at the appointed time.
  The residents of Little Paddock are just as mystified but with typical
British calm, Letitia Blacklock and her companion Dora Panner, and
sophisticated nephew and niece Patrick and Julia, have refreshments at hand.
  By this time, of course, several suspicious characters have been established
and when, at the appointed time, the murder does take place, the stage is set
for some top-class sleuthing. But did the murderer get the right victim? 
  Miss Marple just happens to be staying at the village's Spa Hotel and
it is from there that the victim has come. Primed and ready for action, she
sallies forth.
  Then there is another murder ...
           
