North and South a feast for the east  

THIS week Channel 9 will test the staying power of those who like their
chicken southern-fried and served with the works.
  For this is the week of North and South, the 12-hour lavishly packaged
American drama, sorry, megadrama, which Nine will screen in two-hour episodes
over an exhausting six nights beginning tonight at 8.30 pm.
  The series is based on John Jakes' novel about two families, the Mains,
plantation owners from South Carolina, and the Hazards, Pennsylvania
industrialists, and set during the 20 years leading up to the Civil War.
  The two sons, Orry Main and George Hazard, meet at West Point Military
academy. Despite opposing views on slavery, they develop a close friendship,
uniting the two families.
  A warning - there is a sequel called North and South Book II based on
Jakes' second novel, Love and War. This was screened in the US earlier this
year but goodness knows when it will make it to the screen here.
  Not that this first series has a Return to Eden ending. There is, however,
a niggling feeling of dissatisfaction at the end of things not quite resolved.
A few scenes blatantly point to the second series.
  But North and South draws you in rather like The Wedding - no, no, I am
not going to watch it, but yes, yes, okay, so I did right up until The Kiss
on the balcony.
  It's a high class soap, with honourable goodies and perfectly horrid
baddies, complicated and schmaltzy love stories, duels, southern drawls,
heaving bosoms (and ripped bodices), slave whippings, lavish costumes,
rich locations and a gaggle of guest stars who between them must have taken
a quite a chunk of $US25 million budget.
  The most notable of these is Elizabeth Taylor but it also includes Johnny
Cash, Olivia Cole, Morgan Fairchild, Robert Guillaume, Robert Mitchum,
Jean Simmons, David Ogden Stiers, Gene Kelly, Inga Swenson and Hal Holbrook.
  Some such as Taylor, who plays a whorehouse madame, appear very late in
the series and then for only about five minutes. As Taylor said when asked
what she thought of her character: "There's not really enough of her to
think about, is there?"
  Most of the acting falls to relative newcomers Patrick Swayze and James
Read, who play Orrie and George, and a team of new and familiar faces
including Lesley-Anne Down, Kirstie Alley, Philip Casnoff, David Carradine,
Terri Garber and Temi Le Anne Epstein.
  They are an attractive hardworking ensemble, easy on the eye and adept
at handling the plot tangents and convolutions of this long, long series.
 So, what the heck. If you have 12 hours to spare, put your feet up and
over-indulge. War and Peace it is not but then again, in these grim times,
maybe that's a blessing.
                                                         
