Movie classic's a winner  

  Channel O is quickly earning the reputation as Brisbane's number one
movie channel.
  It leads the way again this week with some first-class movies.
  Perhaps the best is the fifties classic Picnic (Saturday, 8.30pm) which
caused a sensation when it was released.
  William Holden, Kim Novak, Rosalind Russell and Cliff Robertson star in
this interesting movie about high passion in small town America.
  It's a little melodramatic for eighties audiences, but is still a fine
example of a top-class director getting the most out of a strong script.
  The story is centred on a quiet Kansas town preparing for its annual
Labor Day picnic.
  Into this setting wanders Hal Carter (Holden) who manages to have an effect
on virtually the entire town before he is finally through with it.
  Channel O also screens a remake of the Marlon Brando classic, A Streetcar
Named Desire (Monday, 8.30 pm).
  For once, the remake is nearly as good as the original, with Treat Williams
playing the brutal Stanley Kowalski (Brando's role in the 1951 original)
and stunning Ann-Margret as Blanche Dubois.
  Ann-Margret shows she is a far better actress than many people ever gave
her credit for, and her fine performance makes this one of the better movies
of the week.
  Channel O's Sunday night movie, The Cold Room, isn't for those who like
light entertainment.
  George Segal and Amanda Pays star in this movie set in East Berlin.
  It's complicated, so don't get up for a cup of tea or you'll be hopelessly
lost.
  Channel 9 has an interesting movie in the End Of August (Friday, 8.30pm).
  It is surprising to find an American film made along the lines of a European
mood movie.

 Priest  

  Sally Sharp stars as Edna Pontellier, a New Orleans woman trying to find
herself in the early 1900s.
  Channel 7 also kicks in with a better-than-average movie in The Scarlet
And The Black (Monday, 8.30pm).
  Gregory Peck stars in the true story of Monsignor Hugh O'Flaherty, a
Vatican priest who ran an underground escape route during World War II.
  Christopher Plummer and Sir John Geilgud add a touch of quality to the
production.
                 
