<subsample>
	<id> C17d </id>
	


	<source> The Sunday Times WA - 10 August 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Robot pals and other monsters you'll face in the future </h>
	

  The Modern Frankenstein, by Ray Hammond, Blandford Press, $22.95.
  When Mary Shelley published Frankenstein: Or The Modern Prometheus in 1818,
she struck an amazing chord with her gothic horror tale about a scientist
who created life.
 Author Hammond cleverly uses the story of Frankenstein and the circumstances
under which it was written to explore the coming reality of life being created
by modern scientists.
  Hammond is controversial when he suggests that men in future may come
to rely on robot companions - even to the exclusion of human friends.

  War in the Shadows, Bougainville 1944-45, by Peter Medcalf, William Collins,
$19.95.
  The author says very little has been written by or about the efforts of
half a million Australians who served in the Pacific Islands in World War
II.
  This short book was written in response to questions from Medcalf's
daughter about what the war was really like. 
  Medcalf was a 19-year-old infantryman on Bougainville in 1944-45 and the
book vividly tells of the horrors of the jungle war against the Japanese.
  
  Fine Cotton and Me, the confessions of Hayden Haitana as told to Graham
Bauer, Angus and Robertson, $9.95.
  Much has been written about the Fine Cotton ring-in and now comes the
story almost from the horse's mouth.
  Hayden Haitana is the New Zealand trainer who was one of the key men in
the substitution of the open-class sprinter, Bold Personality, for the
out-of-form Fine Cotton in a restricted event at Brisbane's Eagle Farm
racecourse in August 1984.
  But this book goes further than telling Haitana's version of the ring-in.
It is an account of Haitana's life - the life of a self-confessed con artist
who has been involved in everything from theft and fraud on the wharves
to horse doping.

  Choosing A School - Questions Parents Should Ask. by Judith Laird, Kerril
Maloney and Lorraine Moody, Allen and Unwin, $8.95.
  The authors of the latest more-parental-involvement-in-education book
say it is a good idea to know what a school offers in the way of academic
subjects, personal development, programs for gifted or remedial students,
its position on homework, religious education, sport, its educational
philosophy and contact between parents and teachers.
  Other questions should concern facilities, fees, uniforms, transport
and staff. This is a paperback compendium of questions which cover every
aspect of education.

  Working Out With Weights, published by William Collins, $15.95.
  Historians may look at the 1980s as the decade of fitness mania. Getting
fit and staying fit is now attracting millions of people of both sexes and
all ages.
  This book is packed with diagrams and photographs of exercises and equipment,
and there is a comprehensive nutrition guide to help weight-workers achieve
their goals.


</subsample>
