Dwight, 29, moseys on as a fresh country breeze Round-up time for the Jack Daniels, folks  

  THOUGH cowpunk has been around for a while - Australia's own Johnnys are
entertaining exponents of the art - country's image has been in tatters
for some time.
  In the public eye it degenerated into glitz and parody, a fringed and
rhinestone pantomime which let city folk pretend they were tough loners,
and Nashville became the country version of Hollywood.
  Lately, respected musicians such as Elvis Costello, T-bone Burnett and
the Triffids have been paying homage to the real roots of country music
and weaving it back into their work.
  A mountain breeze has been slicing through the fug of Nashville, fresh
air in the form of Dwight Yoakam (pictured), a young Kentuckian who plays
what he calls "hard country" and who's been attracting fans of all musical
tastes.

 Knock-back  

  His debut album, Guitars, Cadillacs Etc, Etc, has been a surprise seller
in recent weeks and repeats success it had when it came out as
two separate EPs in the US.
  Ironically, he had to move to new wave clubs in California where bands
such as Los Lobos and The Blasters had begun to educate a young audience
in genuine roots music because Nashville turned him down.
  "When I played my demos to the executivesexecutive in Nashville, the 
reception was not lukewarm - it was like a stone cold block of ice, they just
sat there and stared at me," said Yoakam, 29.
  "I was able to do pure hard country in LA, but the record companies wouldn't
touch it - that was Nashville's territory and Nashville was uninterested,
almost embarrassed by it - hysterical obligation to the form."
  Yoakam found success opening for bands such as Los Lobos and The Blasters
and found his audience growing way past the cowpunks.
  "At first glance it would appear to be a great irony, but not far below
the surface it started to hit home that this was whence their music came,"
he said.
  "They've all been exposed to hillbilly music in their own preference
or cowpunk or whatever you want to call it. It was the ostracised form of
music that attracted the kids - societies' leaders have never accepted country
music as anything short of uncouth and crass."
  Cowpunk is not a term that fits Yoakam - he's deadly serious about not
bastardising his country music.
  "I play hillbilly music, pure country, that's what we are, just
American honky tonk band," he said.
  Given that country is as broad a term as you can get, Yoakam's been noted
for combining eastern hillbilly, western honky tonk and for being one of
the few new artists incorporating blue grass.
  His band, whom he met while trying to find his seat in LA after leaving
the Kentucky coalmining area where he was born, are Peter Anderson (guitars
and six string bass), J.D. Foster (bass, vocals), Brantley Kearns (fiddles,
vocals) and Jeff Donavan (drums).
  Yoakam plays guitar and a versatile larynx.
  Brought up on gospel and hillbilly, Yoakam has taken traditional scenes
for himself and managed to give them freshness and dignity without losing
the humor and sense of fun underlying much country music.
  There is also a great stepped-up version of Ring Of Fire and a duet with
Lone Justice singer, Maria McKee. 
  Yoakam can break his heart and voice together, set a cracking pace, or
whine down to a reflective tale - even if country to you only means putting
on a string tie and taking to the Jack Daniels. This album is a lovely little
gem. 
    
