<sample>
	<id> D03 </id>
	


	<note> 2006 words </note>
	


	<source> Discovering Paul. The life and message of the Apostle Paul for today. </source>
	


	<h> 4   Paul the Pastor </h>
	

The greatest problem facing the parish minister today is that of burn-out.
Beneath every minister's name-tag should read the words: `Caution: Ministry
is a health hazard!'
  Most ministers committed to God and to the care of the churches pay a
high personal price: the cost of caring.
 Jesus cared for people. He was the good shepherd, a pastor who cared for
them. He laid down his life for his sheep because he loved them. He called
Peter three times, `Do you love me? - Feed my sheep ... Feed my flock ...
Tend my lambs.'
  Ever since, men and women who have heard the call of Christ have undertaken
to be shepherds to the flock of God. They care for his sheep. They are his
pastors. The apostle Paul said that in order to help the church, God gave
to the church the gifts of apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors and
teachers. These pastor/teachers are the people we see day-by-day caring
for the church.
  But there is a cost in caring for the church and many faithful ministers
burn out in paying that price. In any battle, you can expect heavy casualties
among the front line troops. And pastors are in the front line of spiritual
battle.
  Ever since the beginning faithful men of God have become overwhelmed and
despaired. Elijah, after one of the most successful ministries ever in the
name of the Lord, was exhausted and, at the height of his popularity and
success, `walked a whole day into the wilderness. He stopped and sat down
in the shade of a tree and wished he would die. &quot;It's too much, Lord,&quot; he
prayed. &quot;Take away my life; I might as well be dead!&quot;' Jeremiah and Peter
had similar experiences. In recent times a number of studies have been made
covering hundreds of pastors who have burnt out and left the ministry.
  It has been discovered there are a number of similarities among the burn-out
casualties. Those leaving the ministry or collapsing within it are usually
men in the mid-life age span, who do not have personal care shown to them
by the leaders of their denomination at the denominational headquarters;
mostly pastoring small congregations; mostly moving frequently from church
to church; and mostly with a theology that is at odds with what they were
taught in theological college.
  It is interesting to note that the apostle Paul had all of those same
similarities in his life and ministry.
  The causes are also identifiable in the examination of contemporary burn-out
victims: some pastors cannot provide the rugged individualism that is required
by the ministry with its variety of demands; some find their beautiful idealism
shattered by congregations that lapse into old ways and who resist change;
some find the financial pressures of a ministry too great and have to take
other work to supplement their income; and some lack the support of a spouse
who provides constant support in what is a very lonely job.
  Again it is interesting to note that the apostle Paul could be identified
with each of those causes. Consequently it is interesting to compare the
first and the twentieth centuries and to see what it was that enabled Paul
to cope with the cost of caring.

Paul and the pressures of pastoring
Recently I took a scoresheet that had been produced to help ministers discover
areas of stress in their lives today and then, using that scoresheet, I
carefully studied more than half of the New Testament examining both the
epistles of Paul and the accounts in Acts about him, paying special attention
to his speeches and personal comments in his writing.
  I identified a number of pressure points and a similar number of enabling
factors.
  The pressure points faced by the apostle from his own words and writing
are very similar to the causes of burn-out among contemporary ministers.


	<h> 1. The physical dangers of his work </h>
	

Paul was both a preacher and a travelling missionary and as a result he
was open to all kinds of physical hardship, threat and hurt.
  I identified more than thirty occasions in his life, in descriptions of
events or in references through his writing, when he was under extreme physical
danger. While it is not possible to list them all in detail, the following
phrases give a very good picture of the physical danger involved in his
work:

The Jews met together and made plans to kill Saul, but he was told of their
plan. Day and night they watched the city gates in order to kill him.
  He ... disputed with the Greek-speaking Jews, but they tried to kill him.

Paul was well aware of the dangers he ran and he made frequent reference
to those dangers.
  He referred to these in his epistles, particularly when writing to the
church at Corinth where he had faced a number of difficult situations.
Following an attack upon his life, he reflected upon the dangers that he
constantly faced in these words:
  'My brothers, I face death every day!'
  Paul summed it up in one of the most famous paragraphs of any of his letters:

I have worked much harder, I have been in prison more times, I have been
whipped much more, and I have been near death more often. Five times I was
given the thirty-nine lashes by the Jews; three times I was whipped by the
Romans; and once I was stoned. I have been in three shipwrecks, and once
I spent twenty-four hours in the water. In my many travels I have been in
danger from floods and from robbers, in danger from fellow Jews and from
Gentiles; there have been dangers in the cities, dangers in the wilds, dangers
on the high seas, and dangers from false friends. There has been work and
toil; often I have gone without sleep; I have been hungry and thirsty; I
have often been without enough food, shelter, or clothing. And not to mention
other things, every day I am under the pressure of my concern for all the
churches.


	<h> 2. The daily burden of the churches </h>
	

As a pioneer cross-cultural missionary Paul found even the physical strain
of establishing new congregations a great burden. New communities, new
languages, new customs, a new tent-making workshop, all must have been a
tremendous mental strain. But if you add to this the problems of being
rejected, of being physically assaulted and attacked, as well as the burden
of the young Christians who in their eagerness and sometimes wilfulness
perverted their new faith, it is easy to appreciate that daily burden of
`the care of all the churches.'
  Anybody who has travelled through central Turkey over some of the most
rugged mountainous terrain possible would be amazed at the physical stamina
that Paul and his companions showed. Yet that was just a small portion of
years of constant travelling in some of the most inhospitable countries
of the Mediterranean:

Paul and his companions sailed from Paphos and came to Perga, a city in
Pamphylia ... They went on from Perga and arrived in Antioch in Pisidia,
and on the Sabbath they went into the synagogue.

  Sometimes the joy over a congregation such as at Philippi must have balanced
up other congregations where there was constant strain and worry. Constantly
the inability of ordinary Christians to maintain a consistent quality of
Christian life ate into the very heart of Paul. That daily worry would be
enough to turn any man from his calling. Sexual immorality, a spirit of
pride and boastfulness, an inability to relate to other people, and the
temptation to always turn from the true path of the faith to accommodate
the pressures of the world were always the problems the young churches faced
and were at the centre of Paul's consistent care. In writing to the Galatians,
for example, Paul says: 'I am worried about you! Can it be that all my work
for you has been for nothing?... My dear children! Once again, just like
a mother in childbirth, I feel the same kind of pain for you until Christ's
nature is formed in you. How I wish that I were with you now, so that I
could take a different attitude toward you. I am so worried about you!'


	<h> 3. The pressures of managing the church </h>
	

Although Paul didn't have a formal religious function, he did have a spiritual
oversight over a vast area and a large number of churches, ministers and
lay ministers. This involved people of different cultural and language
backgrounds, from the strictest of Jewish conservatism through to those
who had little or no religious belief prior to his contact with them.
  The only reason the missionary journeys were undertaken was because Paul
intended to undertake a routine visit of churches previously established.
  The pastoral epistles came down to us because Paul wanted to immediately
handle problems faced by the local congregations, to give them guidance
in their personal actions and to explain some of his teachings. In one sense
all of the epistles are 'pastoral' in that they are informing the church
on matters pertaining to the pastoral life of the people. Even the letter
to the Romans has behind it a very practical purpose: to introduce his plans
to visit them and then to go on, with their help, to evangelise Spain:

I have been wanting for so many years to come to see you ... I would like
to see you on my way to Spain, and be helped by you to go there, after I
have enjoyed visiting you for a while.


	<h> 4. Theological conflict </h>
	

Paul's frequent theological conflicts and resultant pressures must have
made it difficult for him to continue at the pace he had established in
his ministry.
  The conflicts will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 7 when we consider
Paul as a philosopher. The first conflict we have already noted was with
the apostle Peter and other leaders of the church concerning the reception
of Gentiles into the church. Paul's viewpoint held sway and changed the
history of the church. A further area concerned continual debates with people
who belonged to other religions. He debated with the devotees of various
Greek and Roman gods, with animists, with magicians and the believers of
local superstitions. A further group were his own Jewish compatriots,
particularly the ultra-conservative Pharisees, who believed that every change
was a change for the worse. A final group consisted of some of the Jewish
Christians who wanted to emphasise the keeping of both the old covenant
with its food laws, cultural traditions, circumcision and Sabbath keeping,
along with the new covenant.
  There is an emotional, intellectual and physical price that comes upon
a person who is constantly engaged in having to defend the faith he believes.
Paul knew the burden of theological conflict.


	<h>5. Cultural conflict </h>
	

The following passage indicates the way the Greeks did not like the way
Paul spoke or presented himself in public: 'Paul's letters are severe and
strong, but when he is with us in person, he is weak, and his words are
nothing!'
  These terms of abuse used of Paul were also used in the ancient world
of other speakers and it is quite clear that they referred to a cultural
attitude the Greeks had towards people who did not speak with a correct
form. One of the fundamental principles upon which the Greek status system
rested, as Professor Edwin A. Judge has pointed out, 'is the belief that
fine form is congruent with truth. Cultivation in the literary and artistic
sense was thus a means of legitimising the status of those who could afford
it and precisely because it made a conspicuous difference to a person's
public appearance, it became the means by which the social inferiority of
the uncultivated was imposed on them as a felt distinction.' Paul quite
consciously refused to accept this cultural distinction of the Greeks and
identified with Jesus Christ in his weakness and rejection.


</sample>
