Towards a Scriptural Critique of Racism Two Bible Studies  By John Brown  

I am convinced that our commitment to combat racism stems out of the central
tenets of our faith and that we have no need to seek for an esoteric or
peripheral biblical basis on which to build a commitment against racism.
  Racial discrimination is not about racist attitudes only, but is also
about the oppression - the crushing - of one racial group by another more
powerful racial group. It is about one racial group using its power to maintain
cultural, economic, political or social power over another, and to denigrate
or destroy that group. I cannot therefore use only the image-of-God theology
or the doctrine of creation to talk about the equality of races, and urge
love for one another as a theological imperative against racism. If the
oppressed claim that for themselves, it is a powerful tool in their hands
for their own liberating struggle. If the dominant class claim it, it simply
has tended in the past to reinforce the status quo.
  So I believe that we must start our study with the understanding of
oppression and dependence, exploitation and 'being put down', as the
relationship that pertains in a situation of racial discrimination.
  The experience of the Aboriginal people of Redfern, or of Palm Island,
is like the poor man in 2 Samuel 12:1-6.
        
  Biblical quote  

Tribal Aboriginal people can look at the small pieces of land which they
have left on the map of Australia, and when mining companies or pastoralists
or governments claim that land, they see themselves as being in the situation
of the man with the one ewe lamb which the rich man took from him.
  The cry of the Aboriginal people is like that of the psalmist in Psalm
10:

   Extended biblical quote  

The psalmist both cries out against the arrogant, powerful oppressor who
has no fear of justice or of God and, at the same time, affirms his faith
that God in the end will destroy the mocker, the powerful oppressor, and
that justice will be established.
  Release and justice for the oppressed are a prime concern of God according
to the Old Testament witness. The history of Israel and their meeting with
God begins when they are an oppressed racial minority. Their whole
understanding of God is based on the fact that when they were
a powerless, oppressed racial minority in the most powerful empire of the
world of the time, God rescued them.
  In Exodus 3:7-12 we read:

   Biblical quote  

God is the God who has seen, has heard, who knows, who has come down to
deliver. So from the beginning, racism is obnoxious to the faith of Israel,
and therefore all the law codes of Israel enjoin special loving care for
the strangers who live in Israel. We no longer know who these strangers
were, whether they were remnants of the original inhabitants who were there
when Israel moved into the country, or whether perhaps they were refugees
who had come and sought refuge in Israel from surrounding wars. But in any
case they are non-Israelites, of a different race who happened to be living
in Israel. All the law codes enjoin special care for them.
  Thus Exodus 22:21:

  Biblical quote  

And in the Holiness code Leviticus 19:33:

  Biblical quote  

And finally in the Deuteronomic code 24:17-18:
             
  Biblical quote   
        
And again in Chapter 27 verse 19: "Cursed be he who perverts the justice
due to the sojourner."
  This same theme is taken up also in the Prophets. Justice is to be done
to the poor and the oppressed, injustice to be overthrown and compassion
to be shown to the sufferers. Isaiah 58:6-7:

  Biblical quote  

Anti-racism and love for a minority racial group is not something peripheral
to the faith. It is central to the faith. It arises out of the very
self-understanding of the faithful.
  In the New Testament also the Kingdom of God announced by Jesus Christ
is seen to be good news to the poor and oppressed. This is not peripheral
but central to the Gospel.
  Thus in the story of the birth of Jesus in Luke 2 the angel says to the
shepherd:

  Biblical quote  

The sign of the good news is that the saviour, the Christ, the Lord, is
lying in a chaff box because there is no room for him in the inn. He is
out on the river-bank because there is no room for him in the town. This
is the sign that the good news of the birth of the saviour is indeed good
news to the ostracised, to the people for whom there is no room.
  In Luke 4 we have the story of the temptations. These are a summary of
Jesus sorting out his options as a messiah. What kind of messiah was he to
be? How was he to fulfill his mission? In the temptations which came to
Jesus again and again thrughout his ministry, Jesus rejected the temptation
to be a bread messiah, to feed the hungry, to bring in material plenty;
the option to be a military ruler, either by compromise with the Romans
or by joining forces with the guerillas; and the option to become a miracle
worker who wins the allegiance of the credulous by performing miracles.
He rejects the temptation to do something for the oppressed as an authority
figure. Instead he goes down and lives among and with the poor and oppressed,
sharing their oppression, and from that position alongside and in fellowship
with the oppressed, he acts as their messiah.
  He comes back from the wilderness to the Nazareth synagogue and announces
that he has come to bring good news to the poor, and release to the oppressed.
He goes on to explain that this good news is particularly good news for
the people of other races, the outcasts.
  I had not realised until I saw a masked play in Korea last year how much
the outcasts of Israel centred in the ministry of Jesus. There I saw a masked
dance which was written from the viewpoint of the prostitutes, the lepers,
the foreigners, the tax collectors of Israel.
  Jesus told his disciples, when they gave a party to invite the outcasts
to their parties. He told them to lend, not expecting to receive again.
There is the conversation with the Samaritan woman which takes up a twentieth
of John's Gospel. It is a remarkable story about prejudice and God's acceptance
of people of all races, of a faith that overcomes racism and sexism. There
is the story of the Roman Centurion whose faith Jesus praised as being greater
than the faith of the people of Israel. There is the story of the ten lepers
who were healed, and the Gospel writer makes a point of saying that the one
man who returned to say thank you to Jesus was a Samaritan. There is the
story of the man who was a true neighbour to the man who fell among thieves,
and he puts this self-righteous view to shame by making the hero of this
story not a Jew but one of the despised Samaritans. So it is the people
of the oppressed, despised race who bring help to the rich, powerful and
arrogant Jews.
  In the new community Jesus tells his disciples that they are to love not
only their friends, because even the publicans do that, but also their
enemies.
  Jesus in his death became one of the oppressed. He suffered all that the
oppressed outcasts ever suffer and more. He suffered in order that both the
oppressors and oppressed might see their sins, repent and believe. In this
regard we might consider two passages in the Gospel according to John. First
of all, in John 12:31-32 Jesus, talking about his death on the night before he
is crucified, says: "Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the ruler of
this world be cast out". Everybody else saw the trial of Jesus as the
judgment of Jesus. John interprets it as the judgment of the world. The world
is judged because the world put the only truly righteous person to death. So
all those who suffer righteously have their sufferings taken up in that
self-giving of Jesus when he voluntarily goes to the cross.
  Then in John 13:31, there is the incredible saying of Jesus immediately
after one of his chosen disciples has gone out to sell him up: "Now is the Son
of Man glorified, and in him God is glorified". When is God glorified? God is
glorified at this point when the son of God is put on the cross and killed as
a common criminal. How can that be? When Jesus dies, the love of God is shown
in the most powerful way it could ever be shown. God bears the jibes, the
viciousness, the sinfulness of the world and, as he bears it, he forgives the
sins. This is an incredible love and in that act God is glorified. Jesus gives
himself to the oppressors in order that the oppressors, having killed the
righteous one, might see their sinfulness, their oppression, repent and be
saved.
  Indeed in the Acts of the Apostles in those first chapters, Peter preached
just that to the crowd. He told them that they had killed the righteous one,
the Son of God, and they ought therefore to repent of their sins that God
might forgive them. And we are told how hundreds, no thousands, of people did
repent when they saw the significance of what they had done. 
  Jesus not only gave himself as a sacrifice for the world, but showed us a way
whereby the Church must give itself in order that oppression might be defeated
among us. He said to his disciples on many occasions: "Come take up your Cross
and follow me if you would be my disciples". To take up one's Cross is not to
bear a load of personal pain. It is to bear the blows of the oppressors on
behalf of the oppressed. It is to stand beside the oppressed bearing the blows
that are aimed at them; receiving the wounds that are aimed at them, in order
that the oppressor might see his or her oppression, be convicted and converted
and changed.
  I believe that this tells us much about how Churches might act in regard to
combating the oppression of minority racial groups. We are called to stand
beside and in solidarity with the racially oppressed, and bear some of the
blows that are aimed at them, and that bearing of blows is itself redemptive
and converting.
  Through the sacrifice of Christ we are saved. Out of gratitude we offer
ourselves to bear the Cross, receive the blows, suffer in order that the
oppressed may be set free, and we witness to Jesus Christ.
  We are called into a new kind of community where the question asked is not:
Who is my neighbour? but, What must I do in order to be a neighbour to the
oppressed?
  We are witnesses to a Kingdom which is coming, a Kingdom of love,
righteousness and justice, and in the next study we look a little more at that
vision.

         II  
In Genesis 1:26 God, we are told, created Adam. He saw what he had made and
was pleased. I do not know what colour Adam was or what physical features he
had. We are told that he was made in the image of God which I take to refer to
his intellect, his person, his soul.
  In Genesis 10 we are told that through the blessing of God, Noah became the
common ancester of all the nations and races. 
  To tolerate racial discrimination is therefore at once to deny the
perfection of God's creation. It is to say that God made a lot of mistakes,
making some peoples superior, some inferior. At the same time it is to deny
that Adam is made in the image of God.

