By John Bodycomb Chapter 1 ONE FOR THE DELPHIC ORACLE! WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF AUSTRALIA'S CHURCHES?  

  In 1950 I was among the 77 per cent of Australians who went to church
at best irregularly; my church links were through a youth group, and reflected
more the desires of the flesh than a hunger for the holy. But things changed;
my conversion surprised everyone, including the minister. He was further
surprised the following year, when I told him I believed I was called to
ordained ministry.

 1. RECALLING J.D. NORTHEY  
Hence it was in 1951 that I first met J.D. Northey, to present my credentials
as a candidate in the Congregational tradition. Selection procedures were
less rigorous then than they are today, which was probably to my advantage.
Having been told he was a dignified and scholarly man (both of which were
true), I was suitably apprehensive.
  I was quite unprepared for what lay in wait. J.D. greeted me in blue overalls
and armed with a mattock, with which he was attacking the college garden.
At 62, he had not long quit the tennis court, which had seemed more suitable
than the boxing, cricket and football of his earlier days. He had lost the
sight of one eye in the last-mentioned: a slight disability of which one
became aware if walking on his wrong side. He could wheel quickly, and a
bump from his stocky fourteen stone was a hazard for the unwary.
  From 1952-56 I lived under the same roof with J.D. and Mrs. Northey, in
a small group of bachelors - since we were not permitted to marry until
our courses were over. I can therefore claim to know him better than many
- as a man, as a Christian, and as a minister of the Word. Hence there is
more than the normal degree of privilege attached to being a J.D. Northey
lecturer.
  It is enough here to mention three things I owe him. (That, in itself,
could bring a smile to those who knew J.D., because for him everything came
in threes; he was trinitarian to the end!) First was the need for a high
pain tolerance in the work of ministry; to curl up and fall in a heap with
every bump ill-befits the minister. J.D.'s high pain tolerance came in part
from the loss of his father at twelve; he went to work then to support a
widowed mother, three young brothers and a step-sister.
  Second, I learned from him how critical in an unstructured occupaion are
good self-motivating and self-monitoring devices, lest one become a bumbler
(for which there is ample scope in the ministry!). J.D. was almost
frighteningly well-organised - even to his fifteen-minute siesta each day.
  And third, I learned from him to speak of the divine with a healthy awareness
of one's flawed perception in such things. The only occasion I can recall
getting into real trouble was when I wanted to do something of which J.D.
disapproved strongly. I made the mistake of protesting that I had divine
guidance. He exploded with terrifying force. `How dare you', he said, `invoke
the divine name to justify what you want to do!' That message has stayed
with me; it causes me to hesitate before offering too glib a theological
explanation of this or that in terms of what God might, or might not, be
doing.

 2. THE FLOWERING FIFTIES  

When I told my paternal grandfather, in 1951, that I was relinquishing my
career as an accountant to enter theological school, he was dumbfounded.
`John, you are mad!' he said. `The church is dying! People aren't into religion
any more, and you will be out of a job.' Grandfather was not an unbeliever.
In his ninetieth year he would still descend at the bedside each night on
his creaky old knees and discuss things with the Eternal. However, although
Grandfather was in no doubt about God's survival, he was concerned about
the future of organised religion and its ordained ones - whom I intended
to join.
  As a hearty young convert, I was not in the least worried, and my confidence
was duly vindicated. In the fifties there were clear indications of an upswing
in the fortunes of Australia's churches. A new and successful approach to
fund raising came via Colonel Wells, and the phenomenon of mass revivalism
via Billy Graham. New churches were popping up like mushrooms, sunday schools
were at capacity in the suburban developments, and weekly church attendance
peaked in 1960, at 30 per cent of the population. That represented a leap
of almost one-third on the base figure of 23 per cent a decade earlier.
  Not surprisingly, we concluded that we were doing most things well. There
was no real attempt at isolating out those factors in the church or in the
culture which might have been working in our favour. That kind of exercise
has assumed more importance recently, of course, and we are becoming aware
that explaining the vicissitudes of organised religion is rather complicated.
It is possible to see with the benefit of hindsight that one of the most
potent factors then was demographic; we gained from the post-war baby boom,
which put many more children and youth in touch with the church, and raised
the interest of their parents.
  My first settlement fell in this period, and by generally accepted canons
was very successful. Although it was a city church, there was a large sunday
school and youth group. The evening congregation increased 50 per cent in
spite of TV's arrival on the scene, and the morning congregation doubled.
It was heady stuff, and at the ripe old age of 27 I told a mass gathering
in the Melbourne Town Hall that God was sending a new wave. As always, it
was hard work, but the rewards were there.
  I am not convinced that doing the same things in the same way today would
assure the same results. Indeed, I am fairly sure it would not; many
ingredients in the situation today make it quite unlike that of thirty years
ago.
  (Unfortunately, one of the disadvantages to having a top-heavy age
distribution in our ordained ministry is that older clergy can have a tendency
to look backwards for their operational models. After all, that is where
it happened, and when one is three-quarters down the track, it can be hard
not to think, `If it worked then, why shouldn't it work now?')
  Thirty-five years after my grandfather's gloomy prognosis, there are still
churches. Indeed, as I have often argued, it may be quite inappropriate
to say with Bruce Wilson that Australians are `taking flight from religion'.
Unless we equate being religious with churchgoing, there is a wealth of
evidence from what I call the `far side of the moon' to the contrary.
  In fact, the same proportion claims to attend weekly worship now as made
that claim in 1950: 23 per cent. When we consider the decline in Catholic
attendance over this period (from almost 70 per cent to less than 40 per
cent), it is apparent that something has picked up the slack. Furthermore,
since the 23 per cent who claim to be in church every week cannot be the
same as those who made that claim in 1950, it is obvious that many more
must have `gotten religion' to replace the dead and the drop-outs. Finally,
since the population has doubled between 1950 and 1986, 23 per cent today
is twice as many in raw numbers.

 3. THE EMPTY PEWS AND SLACKENING TIES  

  To some extent, of course, this is statistical game-playing. One is
reminded of that comment by the Scottish writer, Andrew Lang: `He uses
statistics as a drunken man uses lampposts - for support rather than for
illumination!' Lest we delude ourselves by the foregoing, two observations
are appropriate. First is that right across Western society, growing numbers
still classify themselves as `Christian' and give assent to traditional
items of belief, but have been showing less inclination toward regular
churchgoing. Second, those churches most seriously affected are what we
call the `liberal mainstream', which includes the tradition to which we
belong.
  This is not to say church attendance is everywhere declining. Contrary
movements can be cited; e.g. Poland, Korea and Latin America. In the first
two, piety and packed churches cannot be separated from national patriotism
and the desire to combat a threatening alternative (communism). In Latin
America, a groundswell of resistance to social injustices has much to do
with a variety of ways church allegiance is maintained. 
  But in each case where church life appears to be vigorous in one style
or another, we are dealing with widely-different streams; any attempt to
find a simple, single-cause explanation which accounts for all is naive.
Yet, some common features can be found: in each of the foregoing, the corpus
of Christian tradition has been locked into the deepest aspirations of the
masses. Therefore, in one sense each may be regarded as a radically
`contextual' expression of organised religion - needed there and now by
reason of the social and cultural context, but not necessarily appropriate
in other places or other times.
  The trends in this country are of a different order, and are broadly
consistent with what can be seen in other Western societies. That is to
say, the liberal mainstream churches are losing ground numerically, and
this process looks like continuing. It is particularly apparent in the Uniting
Church. For example, the 1984 Victorian Synod survey showed that, from 1978
to 1984, confirmed membership fell by nearly 10 per cent. If that trend
were to continue (and we have no contrary evidence at this stage), membership
by the end of the century could be under 55,000, from over 83,000 in 1978.
Second, on any given Sunday just under half our members are in their pews;
put another way, every week half the members are missing.

 4. THE SCOPE AND STYLE OF THESE LECTURES  

  And so, the issue to which these lectures are addressed is that of church
growth and decline - not in Poland, Latin America or Korea, but in Australia.
In fact, they are even more tightly focused - concentrating principally
on the Uniting Church in Australia. Developments outside Australia are not
ignored; indeed, some note is taken of what is happening elsewhere. However,
the reasons why churches register gains or losses in one place may be quite 
different from the reasons for gains and losses elsewhere. 
  Because it is important to know both what to expect and what not to expect,
it should be understood that there is no attempt here to present a theological
rationale. The lectures are primarily an exercise in thinking sociologically,
for reasons which will be explained shortly. Neither do they set out to
deal with the global mission of Christ's people - as apostles for a just
and humane planetary culture. In short, this is not a set of theological
lectures, and neither is it a manifesto for Christian mission. One is entitled
to ask, `Why choose the subject of church growth and decline?' There would
seem to be at least three reasons for doing so.
  One is that for many church people it is a very live issue. It even keeps
many of them awake at night. Perhaps it should not, but it does! Experience
shows that continually skirting the issues which concern people, and instead
pressing what we believe `should' concern them, works only with some of
the people some of the time. If church growth and decline is a serious concern
for a significant number, it should be addressed.
  A second reason is that the subject seems to elicit a great deal of
ill-advised nonsense. Ups and downs in active support for organised religion
are not amenable to simple, single-cause explanations, but are extremely
complex. Some of the urgings of beatific and bright-eyed enthusiasts can
be damaging if they oversimplify these phenomena.  Chapters 2 and 3 identify a range of factors both external and internal, and examine their significance.

