Jesus the sinner's mate By John Hannaford  

IS IT BLASPHEMOUS TO SEE GOD AS A friend? Does He dwell in unapproachable
light? There seems at all times to have been a dispute about the `otherness'
of God, and how approachable He is.
  The Jewish testimony of faith was that God was `other' and awesome and
this is gathered up in the idea of holiness. As Isaiah reported: `Holy, Holy,
Holy, The Lord Almighty is Holy' (Isaiah 6:3, G.N.B.).
  Yet the Old Testament also has a strand of intimacy in the relations of
the deity and the devotees. Yahweh was the husband and lover to Israel and
Judah. David saw Yahweh as a caring shepherd to a `pet' lamb. (We need to
remember that Israel treated sheep differently from us. They had small flocks
and knew each sheep by name, only eating meat at major religious feasts.)
  Enoch spent time with God in fellowship, Moses saw God face to face and
Abraham was the friend of God.
  The easy familiarity with God that belonged to the golden age of innocent
man, in the Garden of Eden, was reapproached only occasionally. But there
is the promise of restoration hinted at, a return to the Garden Paradise
when God is again our friend.
  To have strolled with the Master Gardener - sometimes talking over the
day's business, crops and yields, or sometimes silent - and to have been
friends in the pleasant intimacy of a garden, is a clear picture of paradise
and the joy stored up for us in heaven.
  Jesus is the restorer of that lost relationship.
  Jesus claimed an intimacy with God, indeed, to be God. Yet He shocked
the `separated ones', the Pharisees, by mixing with ordinary people.
  Jesus was accessible to all men and cheerfully mixed with the underworld
and prostitutes. The outrage of the good religious people was expressed
in their scornful outburst, "Here is a...friend of tax collectors and
`sinners'" (Matthew 11:19).

MORE THAN ONE EVANGELIST HAS PORtrayed Jesus as the sinner's friend. Yet
recently one of Australia's best published theologians cautioned against
viewing Jesus as a friend. In fact, hardly anyone does speak of Jesus as
a friend, except in one well-known hymn. 
  It seems obvious to me from John's fifteenth chapter and throughout the
gospels that Jesus came and lived as a friend to all, even the poor, the
outlaws and the undesirables.
  But how genuine was that friendship? Did Jesus just `act' friendly? Is
He really our friend today?
  Jesus said in John 15:12,13, "My commandment is this: Love each other
as I have loved you. Greater love has no one than this, that one lay down
his life for his friends."
  What a relief - from His part He really did offer true friendship and
true caring. What is our part of friendship?
  You can't be mates unless you share - that is obvious from Australian culture,
and from reading more in the New Testament. In A Peculiar People, the
fascinating book about `New Australia', the utopian journey that went from
the 1890 shearers' strike to Paraguay, Gavin Souter tells of Labour leader
Lane's rediscovery of God and, incidentally, quotes a court hearing about
mateship. Mates were more than acquaintances - they shared. Mates took one
cheque and held a common purse (kitty).
  As a young post-war Australian, it was not until after I left primary
school that I got through Anzac week without hearing of the thrilling courage
of Private Simpson and the Red Cross donkey which served as a Gallipoli
ambulance until Simpson paid the supreme sacrifice and laid down his life
for his mates. The Victoria `Cross' expressed it as no other star or medal
could. There were other heroes too.
  Perhaps with a mythology like this, Aussies find it easier to relate to
Jesus than His church. (I mean `mythology' technically - as the ideal
recollection of an event which shapes our current values.) The source of
the severe standard for judging the church may be in this ideal.
  This `real' mateship finds a poor substitute in sitting in rows for an
hour on Sunday, with perhaps an extra Bible study or a lukewarm cup of tea
thrown in.
  We know it takes two to be friends. We can't do it alone and we are commanded
both to love one another and also told what love is.
  It is a common theme in the New Testament. An old enemy of Jesus commented,
"We were God's enemies but He made us His friends through the death of His
son" (Romans 5:10 GNB). And Jesus' best friend said, "This is how we know
what love is: Christ gave His life for us. We too, then, ought to give our
lives for our brothers" (1 John 3:16 GNB).
  I feel a bit funny calling John the evangelist of old Jesus' best friend,
because actually He's my best friend too.
  The rest of the passage from the fifteenth chapter of John's Gospel goes
on to say:
  "You are my friends if you do what I command you. I don't call you servants
any longer, because servants don't know what's on the master's mind. Instead
I call you friends, because I've told you everything I have heard from the
Father. You didn't choose me, I chose you and appointed you to go and bear
much fruit, the kind of fruit that endures."
  Quite clearly we are Jesus' friends if we care for each other and follow
His directions. It's good to know that Jesus chooses to be our friend, calls
us friends, and wants us to go on to make lasting friends. `Lasting friends'
for ourselves, and for Him, is surely what `fruit that endures' is all about.

PART OF WHAT HAS BOGGED DOWN THE church is that we simply are not in the
business, the family business, of making friends that last.
  Much of the dross which passes for discipleship is not the true gold but
merely information transfer. Many a man or woman would cheerfully take on
teaching a discipleship class - but what, in Australia, is closest to
discipleship?
  How many would befriend the entire class?
  When I was first ordained I was warned against making friends in the parish.
It seems to have been common, if wrong, advice.
  Yet discipleship is more than easygoing acquaintanceship. There is also
learning.
  I preached one sermon on discipleship with a driver's `L' plate around
my neck. Part of discipleship surely means `driver under instruction'.
But it is friendship as well, and it is definitely on-the-job learning,
not classroom teaching.
  By custom and necessity along the narrow tracks of Palestine, a band of
friends walked line-astern, and followed the leader. But across the wide
dusty Australian plains, He'd say `Walk with me', as well as `Follow me'.
  Yes, He is the only Son of God. He is the Truth and I'm only a man - but
He offered men then, and me now, His friendship.
  If you walked with Him and talked with Him then you were His mate and
you became a disciple.
  Jesus said, as you learn to do things His way - in fact make friends His
way, for Him - you are bearing much fruit and so becoming (or showing yourself)
to be disciples (John 15:8).
  It was His own actions, Jesus went on to say in the same chapter, that
made people hate Him. Those actions included befriending outlaws and `scum'
as much as healing and preaching.

IN RECENT TIMES THERE HAS been a healthy tread away from emphasis on conversion
to emphasis on discipleship.
  But perhaps it is an over-correction. The Bible speaks of the gift of
evangelism, although many churches seem to have misunderstood its meaning.
  I hardly know how to illustrate just how ludicrous it is to ask people
you don't know to become followers of Jesus, whom they don't know.
  It seems ridiculous to ask people in our culture, on the basis of a 20
minute story, to make a `decision'. You wouldn't try to get married on that
basis, but you might make a date. You wouldn't make a lifetime friend on
that basis either, though you might start being friendly. We ought to treat
being a Christian at least as seriously.
  To set the scene, let me tell a little story.
  Imagine a well-meaning headmaster who believes that the best friendships
start at school but who is shocked to realise that he has many new students
who do not know each other well enough to be friends.
  He asks the local minister to organise for them to become friends.
  The assembly begins with a short welcome and explanation. In the next
hour the minister and the headmaster would like them to become friends.
It would be nice to have time to use names and find out a few details but
to save time each is given a number, starting from one.
  Taking a number from the hat the minister explains that the person behind
the number needs a true friend. Someone to share their lunch, to take their
notes in class if the other is sick.
  Some detail is given: being a real friend would mean walking home together,
perhaps even moving to a closer home to allow more visiting. Certainly a
true friend would have to change subjects so that they could do projects
together. And it is to be a life-long commitment. 
  So the students are asked to signify who will be the life-long friend
of the first number from the hat.
  If no one puts a hand up at once, a few jokes are told about numbering
off and friendship generally to relax the class. A girl from last year's
`Friend for Life' school assembly is brought in to say it worked out well
for her. It is a moving testimony.
  Then the school choir sings a song about friendship and a rousing appeal
is given for a volunteer to be the friend of number X.
  A new number is drawn from the hat and the process is repeated.
  What a simple, quick process to make friends the headmaster and minister
have discovered. But is it any good?
  Aussies don't like to be pushed into friendship - but they are loyal to
an old friend.
  By no means am I denying the role of an evangelist or even less the need
for a crisis encounter with the Lord of the Earth. But I simply want to
say that this is a secular country with church-going numbers roughly comparable
to percentages in Japan and Pakistan.
  `Out there' they think Jesus is something to do with dropping a brick
on your bare foot, something to do with Father Christmas, and a reasonable
bloke who wouldn't ask a worker to get up early on Sundays.
  That anyone responds to such an appeal says a lot for `irresistible grace'
and little for cultural sensitivity. It is not the way to make friends in
our culture, is it?
  And, of course, Jesus is not presented as a friend anyway. `A cosmic
aspro' for life's little bothers seems the technique of our American brothers.
A mixture of legalism, ethical and religious propositions, the answer to
guilt, the antidote to sin or even mediaeval nostalgia is offered by others.
  Jesus is everything to me and sometimes some of the above. But above all,
He is my `true-blue' friend. You might be able to sell an aspro, but no-one
has sold me a friend. Instead, it happened by introduction.

  PEOPLE HAVE INTRODUCED ME to friends. My sister introduced me to Janine,
now my wife. Other friendships have started by sharing a common interest
or experience.
  I believe Christ the Ascended King gifted His church with gifts like mercy,
help and hospitality which bridge the gap in helping people become friends.
  The way I see it happen is that you may just be a terrific friend, the
best bloke in the street, and so you are asked what makes you different.
              
