Sister Emmanuelle By Peter Philp  

At the age of 12 she prayed that one day she would become a nun. As a teenager,
she loved to go out with boys, go to dances and dress up in expensive clothes.
As a nun she became a professor of philosophy and then in her sixties, Sister
Emmanuelle's life-long dream came true. She went to live on a garbage dump.
  Rather than retiring in the relative comfort of a French convent, this
sprightly old nun moved into Zabbaleen garbage tip in Cairo with a community
of killers, thieves and outcasts, who drank excessively and smoked hashish.
  And this was done with a papal blessing.
  Nobody, including her spiritual directress, ever dreamed that young Madelene
(as she was known before joining the order) would last the distance in the
convent. How would a joie de vivre, who liked to disobey all authorities,
survive the disciplined life expected of all community members in an Our
Lady of Sion convent. Equally as strong as their doubts, was her confidence
in the vocation calling that had been with her since childhood and the words
of St. Paul: "I can do anything with Jesus Christ who strengthens me".
  Half a century later Sister Emmanuelle is still a member of the Sion Order.
Now at 77 she is planning to confront another new frontier, the outcasts
in Sudan.

 Not a Mother Teresa  

  Even as a young religious sister, Emmanuelle wanted to move out with the
poor and dedicate her life in total service to them. But community rules
prevented this. For decades, the nun had to be content serving God's people
as a teacher.
  "My superior told me that if I felt it necessary to live with the poor,
then I should feel free to go. For me, I am not like Mother Teresa of Calcutta.
She was in the same situation. She decided to leave her congregation (the
Loreto Sisters) and go alone and live with the poor. But Mother Teresa,
I think, is very strong. I am Sister Emmanuelle. I believed that if I left
my congregation I would leave a part of my strength behind", recalled the
nun.
  These years were extremely fruitful for Emmanuelle. She became a very
successful teacher and during this time, God prepared her with new insights
for the future. Rules and priorities changed dramatically following the
Second Vatican Council.
  Permission was granted to many religious to go out into the world and
become visible people with the poor. One of the first to leave community
life was Emmanuelle.

 Real poverty  

 On arrival in Alexandria, Egypt, the French nun came face to face with
real poverty. The children she was now teaching were so different from those
in Europe. Most of them were not properly fed.
  "Many families could only afford beans. In the convent we were used to
eating meat", remarked Sister Emmanuelle.
  One day she was visiting a very deprived family and noticed a tiny one-room
shack in the backyard. She asked the family why eight people were crammed
into two rooms and this other area was empty.
  "Nobody wants to live in there because it is very damp", replied the mother.
  Immediately Sister Emmanuelle wrote to her superior requesting permission
to move into this shack.
  The professor was now with the people she loved. She made her home in
the tiny shack and ate beans with the family. However, the board that
Emmanuelle paid did allow the household to eat some meat.
  It was the Papal Nuncio in Cairo who first directed the sister's path
towards the Zabbaleen garbage tip.
  "You want to share your life with the poor?", he asked. "Then come with
me to the slums."

 Rejected - unloved  

  The archbishop had been alerted to the grinding poverty in the nearby
garbage tip by a 12-year-old boy. The Papal Nuncio had noticed the lad coming
to his house each day to collect the rubbish. One day the archbishop went
home with the boy. He witnessed a community of people struggling for life
amidst mountains of garbage. In the summer months the area was the breeding
ground for millions of flies; it was a seething mass of disease. He had
come across a neighbourhood, mainly representing the Coptic Christian
tradition, who were totally rejected and unloved by their society.
  "Will you help me Sister Emmanuelle?", enquired the Nuncio.
  Many of her Egyptian friends thought the Papal Nuncio was mad to allow
a woman to go and live in this district. She was warned that the Zabbaleen
people were killers and thieves. They drank and smoked hashish. This was
no place for one of God's holy sisters.
  Disciplined - yes, but still very independent was Sister Emmanuelle. To
live with the despised and poor was something she believed God had always
called her to do. All she could think about were the words of St. Paul:
"I can do anything with Jesus Christ who strengthens me".
  "It was because nobody wanted to go there that I felt in my heart that
someone must help. So I went", smiled Sister Emmanuelle.

 Leading her donkey  

  She entered Zabbaleen leading her donkey, taking with her a bed, a small
table, a water jug and her Bible. The community was amazed to see this European
woman and her donkey.
  Arrangements had been made for her to move into an abandoned hovel. The
shanty was home to some birds and goats.
  "I took away the pigeons and put the goats in the yard with the pigs.
I swept where it was necessary and set up my things", explained the sister.
  Almost straight away she was out with the people.
  "Some of them might be killers, but if you smile and look at them with
respect and shake their hand they will never take out their knives and kill
you", she said.
  The biggest problem the Sion nun experienced was the filth of the area.
Everything she touched was dirty. Water had to be bought and carried into
the district. Quickly she felt deep frustration. So much disease. So many
sick and malnourished people and only one body to help them.
  "Never did I feel like giving up. I love these people too much and they
love me so much. When you love somebody you want to share in their lives.
That is what Jesus did", said Sister Emmanuelle.

 Taught by poor  

  The Sion nun brought love, medical and nutritional assistance to the children
and the women, but they in turn taught the philosophy professor so much.
Firstly they showed her the meaning of patience. Many of the women at Zabbaleen
were victims of savage beatings, inflicted by their husbands.
  "I could not bear for somebody to beat me. I would run away, but these
women bore it", she whispered.
  Once she was treating a mother who had sustained head injuries after a
beating from her husband. The sister advised the woman to take her children
and go. Emmanuelle explained that she would help support the woman.
  "I cannot", replied the mother. "If I go with my children, they will suffer.
They love their father so much. If I leave my children they will suffer.
I don't want that to happen. It is myself who has to serve. I will stay."
  The poor taught the sister the Christ-like meaning of sharing. "A poor
woman, one very hot night, gave me all her water and all her bread. The
most precious thing you have in summer in a slum is water. The woman was
a Muslim."
  Sister Emmanuelle has been a member of the Zabbaleen community for about
14 years. Life in this grotesque corner of Cairo has begun to change, not
through one person, but because of a partnership between one nun and thousands
of garbage collectors. Their aim is to build a house for each family. To
have every child on the tip going to school. (When Sister Emmanuelle arrived
only 10 went to school, now hundreds are attending.) The barren landscape,
scarred by mountains of rubbish, is now starting to grow trees and flowers.
One section of the area has electricity; Sister Emmanuelle is organizing
the electricity connection to the whole district. The men are busy digging
wells to draw fresh water.
  Old soldiers never die, they just fade away, goes the old saying. What
happens to old nuns? They just go on undertaking bigger and bigger ministries.
Sister Emmanuelle wants to extend her work to slum dwellers in Sudan. 
              
