Power in the church by Brian L. Smith  

At a regional synod of the Methodist Church in 1976, Queensland National
Party Senator Stan Collard stated that he had learnt his politics in the
Methodist Church in North Queensland. As expected this remark was greeted
with laughter. It was not however the laughter of Christians who thought a statement was ludicrous, but rather of those who could identify with
the claim because they knew all too well the truth that lay behind it. They
had experienced first hand the struggles and manoeuvering for power that
characterise the life of many parishes and congregations.

Whenever and wherever a number of human beings are gathered for a common
purpose - whether it be a sporting club or a multinational corporation,
a kindergarten committee or a state - there will inevitably be a struggle
for power, a quest by some to exert their will over others which may be
met with acceptance, resignation or resistance. The church, even with its
divine origins and purpose, is comprised of a number of human beings and
as such is no less susceptible to power struggles than any other grouping
of people.

Many opportunities for the church to experience the liberating power of
the gospel within its own life and structures are lost because this simple
fact concerning the reality of its life is either not recognised or is
deliberately ignored.

A young minister in his first parish lay sleepless, metaphorically pulling
the knives out of his back after a particularly torrid church meeting. In
the small hours of the morning after a painstaking analysis of the meeting,
he came to the conclusion that the whole thing could only be understood
in terms of different people trying in various ways to assert power over
others. To his surprise, when he later applied this analysis to a broad
sweep of parish activities, he discovered that it could account for many
incidents which to that point had appeared puzzling and unconnected. Because
he had stumbled across the reality of the struggles to exercise power that
underlay much of parish life at that time, he was able for the first time to
gain an integrated and comprehensive understanding of the situation in
which he sought to serve.

Many Christians are not so fortunate. How many ministers have toiled hard
but made little headway because they have not understood the structures
of power that were already operating amongst lay people in the parish or
congregation to which they have been called? How many gifted, caring lay
people have found themselves unable to break into an `in group' and so have
never been allowed to participate fully in a congregation and make their
unique contribution to its life and witness?


 Rationalisation and denial  

The major reasons why we fail to identify power struggles in the church
for what they are may be summarised as rationalisation and denial.

Rationalisation:  Very few Christians who want to exercise power and become
involved in power struggles actually see themselves in this light. In their
own minds they are always involved in something far more noble: `a matter
of principle', `right doctrine', `the responsibility the church has given
me in this matter', `the better ordering of the church's life', `our concern
about what is happening to our people'. I do not want to suggest that whenever
any of these or similar phrases are used they always hide a more ambivalent
motivation. However, we all need to recognise that whereas we might identify
the desire to exerise power as a motivation in someone else, we are rarely
able to discern the same motivation in ourselves. We readily rationalise
our own desires for power under more worthy aspirations.

Denial:  As Christians we are aware that power struggles are not only a
characteristic of human life but also a symptom of its brokenness, and as
they are also aware that Jesus' comment on the dominating exercise of power
over others was `it shall not be so among you' (Mark 10:43), many deny the
existence of power struggles and domination in the church. 

