Sharing the glory of Christ  

  On Ascension Day we prayed:
  "God mounts his throne to shouts of joy; a blare of trumpets for the Lord"
(Reponsorial Psalm); and: "May we follow Christ into the new creation, for
his ascension is our glory and our hope" (Opening Prayer). We gave thanks
for the glorification of Christ, and expressed the hope that we might one
day be caught up in that same triumph and joy.
  Today's liturgy takes its tone from the feast of the Ascension.
- The gospel features Jesus' own prayer that we should share his glory:
"Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am, so that they
may always see the glory you have given me."
- In the passage from the Apocalypse the risen Lord says: "Very soon now
I shall be with you again, bringing the reward," to which the Church responds
longingly: "Come, Lord Jesus."
- In the Acts of the Apostles' account of St. Stephen's martyrdom it is
recorded that the saint was given a vision of the ascended Lord.
  Actually today's reading from Acts says much more. It speaks not only
of Stephen's coming into the glory of Christ; it emphasises that this witness
to Jesus was first asked to duplicate the sufferings of his Lord. The parallels
between Stephen and Jesus in their respective deaths are deliberately spelt
out:

        - Both were brought before the Sanhedrin.
        - Both had false witness giving evidence against them.
        - Both were accused of blasphemy.
        - Both were taken outside the city to be killed.
        - Both prayed for their enemies.
        - At the moment of death, both spoke an almost identical prayer:
        "Father, into your hands I commend my spirit." "Lord Jesus, receive
        my spirit."

  In all these parallels, St. Luke (who wrote the Acts) is saying: the life
of Jesus continues in the life of the Church; the disciple of Jesus, like
the Master, must take up the cross; if we aspire to union with Christ in
glory, we must first be prepared to endure for his love. As St. Paul put
it: "Yet so we suffer with him that we might also be glorified with him"
(Romans 8, 17); or again, in the words of St. Paul: 
  "All I want to know is Christ, and the power of his resurrection, and
to share his sufferings by reproducing the pattern of his death. That is
the way I can hope to take my place in the resurrection of the dead ... And
so I press on towards the prize which God calls us to receive in Christ
Jesus" (Philippians 3, 10-15).

                                  Max Barrett, C.SS.R.  

