The Eucharist in our lives  

  Written a mere quarter-century after the death of Jesus, Paul's letter
to the Corinthians is most valuable because it shows the central place already
occupied by the Eucharist in christian worship.
  As at the Last Supper, so 25 years later at Corinth, the Eucharist was
celebrated in the context of a meal.
  The liturgical occasion was meant both to symbolise and to foster christian
unity.
  ("That they be one" had been Christ's prayer at the Last Supper. "As the
branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it abides in the vine, neither
can you, unless you abide in me" (John 15, 4). St. Paul told the Corinthians
(1 Cor. 10,17): it is Christ in the Eucharist who brings about this oneness.
"Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body, for we all partake
of the one bread.")
  An abuse had crept into the Corinthian church whereby unity was being
threatened. The christians there had split into factions. This was bad enough.
What was worse, their factionalism was being carried over into the celebration
of the Eucharist. Instead of joining together in a love-feast, the various
cliques remained apart. The poor went hungry; the rich over-indulged and
some even became drunk. This meant that they were not only shattering christian
unity; they were also sacrilegious in their unworthy reception of their
Lord.
  St. Paul dealt with this situation by recalling the tradition handed down
to him - and he quoted the sacred words of Christ in instituting the Eucharist.
Then Paul added: "As often as you shall eat this bread and drink this cup,
you proclaim the death of the Lord, until he comes. Therefore, whoever eats
this bread or drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily, will be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord."
  Today's feast of Corpus Christi invites reflection on many truths. For
instance:
  (a) As the fathers of Vatican II said, "The Mass is the centre of the
whole christian life." Without the Mass, the follower of Christ is necessarily
eccentric.
  (b) Our attendance at Mass and particularly our reception of Jesus in
Communion demand deep reverence.
  (c) In the sacrifice of the Mass, Jesus does not die again. Why, then,
does St. Paul say: "You proclaim the death of the Lord"?
  At the consecration of the Mass, Christ is truly present under the appearance
of bread and wine. And just as his glorified body is now eternally marked
by the five wounds, so does his glorified Person contain the unlimited merits
of his dying. At the Mass, Jesus comes to us with the unlimited richness
of his sacrificial death. In this wondrous sense we proclaim the death of
the risen Lord.
  (d) Christ's sacrifice transformed the world. At Mass, we are invited
to live our lives in ever-closer union with the Eucharistic Lord, allowing
him to transform each one of us personally.
                                                Max Barrett, C.SS.R. 

