Family Faith By Anne Fitzgerald LIVING ON LESS AND LIKING IT MORE  

  During 1985, our church held a seminar with Neil Milne, a missionary with
World Map. He challenged us toward the end of his message concerning the
words of Jesus, `If any man will follow Me, let him deny himself...' (Matt.
16:24). Neil said, `You may have something legitimate; you can have it,
but you deny yourself.' Neil had been talking to us about the Third World
countries and India in particular. I got to thinking about things the Lord
had been speaking to me during the previous year.
  There was a time when the poorer countries of the world were considered
`dark' countries that were steeped in idol worship, greatly disadvantaged
economically and in need of God. Hence we very kindly sent out missionaries.
We were considered `blessed' to have everything they didn't have. They were
considered `cursed' because they didn't know God and suffered accordingly.
  Today, however, as the light of God penetrates their cultures, we find
that they have so much more than us spiritually, and are moving into the
supernatural manifestations of the Holy Spirit so much more easily than
we are. Meanwhile, we still have all the things they don't have, and more,
and seem to be missing out on the extent of the supernatural they are enjoying.
What has happened is that our materialistic society has caused us to become
clogged and bogged down, when it was designed to be a blessing for others
and our money a tool for God to use.

                         MODEST LIVING  

  To deny ourselves, while everyone around us is getting as much as they
can as fast as they can, is a miserable sounding gospel at the best of times,
yet Jesus still says, `If any man will follow Me, let him deny himself...'
  In her excellent book, Living on Less and Liking it More, Maxine Hancock
gives us a clue to solving this dilemma.
  `Living modestly, by choice, means living somewhere below that level that
could be maintained if all of your income were administered for the family's
needs and wants. Years ago, when deep freezers came into the general public
market, I remember a discussion in our home about purchasing one. With a
growing family to feed, my frugal mother could see the obvious economic
advantages of owning a home deep freeze. Mother and Dad discussed the deep
freeze two or three times. Each time, the discussion died away and did not
resurface for several months.
  `Finally, a family-sized deep freeze was bought. I just assumed my parents
had purchased the freezer as soon as they could afford it. Because they
were people who did not let their right hand know what their left hand was
doing, I didn't stumble upon the truth until much later in a conversation
with my mother.
  ``Why didn't you get it earlier?' I pressed.
  `My mother shrugged. `Because several times when we had the money laid
aside for the freezer, the Lord brought to our attention someone who had
a greater need.'
  `That's restraint. And it results in modest living. Modest living is refusing
to be coerced by T.V. and other advertising, into feeling that everything
five years or older is obsolete and in need of replacing.
  `But it does not necessarily mean living in a deprived state. It simply
means that income entrusted to a family is to be administered for the glory
of God. And that will require restraint in personal spending. Modest living
demands a strong sense of realism, something often dulled by easy credit
and high pressure advertising. It means living within our limited budgets
whether they are limited of necessity or by choice.'
  Something within me was excited by this concept.
  In our society it is hard enough for us to go without the things we can't
have, let alone the things we can have.
  Around this time I lost my purse with $100 in it and experienced the usual
anger and sense of frustration. As the days went by and it wasn't returned,
I decided I would use it as an opportunity to learn something, rather than
waste negative energy being upset. I saw that we were surviving quite well
anyway; our needs were still being met. So I let it go and left it with
the Lord. I reasoned that if we had survived so well when I lost $100, maybe
I could give more away and `survive' a great deal better than I might have
imagined.
  I am not a stranger to giving by any means. I was taught as a child to
tithe my pocket money. As a wage earner I continued this giving and in our
marriage we tithe and give offerings to the Lord's work. We are raising
three boys on a moderate wage, and I don't work, so it is not always easy
to give. But we know it is God's plan and way to blessing.

                         USE WHAT YOU HAVE  

  But here God was challenging me to a little more personal giving. I always
treated my housekeeping with care to meet the needs of my family. However,
I began to look around for ways I could give small amounts of money by limiting
my buying to food, petrol and clothing the children needed - and I mean,
needed.

