<subsample>
	<id> D16b </id>
	


	<source> Acts Tracts  - 1986 </source>
	


	<h> When You've Had a Bad Day </h>
	


	<bl> by Dick Innes </bl>
	

Walter Elias froze with fascination.
  A sensitive child, Walter had grown up in the city until he was five years
old, when his family moved to a farm. One day, two years later, Walter was
walking through an apple orchard when he discovered, to his amazement, an
owl perched on a low branch.
  Remembering that his father had told him that owls hunted at night but
slept during the day, Walter crept quietly towards the sleeping bird.
  `What a wonderful pet this funny creature would make,' he thought to himself.
So, sneaking right up behind it, he stealthily reached up and seized it
by the legs.
  Whew! What a shock both were in for. Terrified, the owl went berzerk.
Flapping wings frantically, screeching loudly, and struggling furiously,
it did everything in its power to escape.
  Equally terrified, Walter panicked. He clung to the bird for dear life.
In utter terror, he eventually threw it to the ground and stamped it to
death. When the struggle ended and the pounding of his heart subsided
somewhat, Walter looked down at the broken and bloodied bird ... and cried.
  Feeling terrible, he ran from the orchard, but later returned to bury
the owl. For months he dreamed of this bird he had wanted for a pet but
in terror had killed.
  Too ashamed to tell anyone, he kept his secret to himself. Only years
later did he share it.
  Perhaps it was this grief more than anything else that helped make Walter
the person he became. Never could he bring that owl back to life, but he
made all the animals of the forest come alive through his drawings and the
wonderful entertainment centre named after himself.
  His full name? Walter Elias Disney.
  Have you ever failed or felt as if you had? Ever done something that you
later felt terrible about? Or experienced a business or personal setback
that gave your self-concept a beating? Or gone through a relationship breakdown
that left you feeling less than whole? Or perhaps experienced some physical
hardship, handicap, sickness or a mental breakdown that devastated you?
  If so, welcome to the human race. When we fail or feel as though we have
failed, we tend to think we are the odd person out. It isn't so. Everyone
of us has failed at something. We have all done things we are sorry for.
We have all faced setbacks at some time or another and felt as if we were
going under. I certainly have.
  It can be very easy to `preach' from an ivory tower or be an armchair
theorist and give out simplistic solutions to life's everyday struggles
if you've never failed, suffered, or been heartbroken, lonely, sick, or
overwhelmed with discouragement.
  But for what it might be worth, if*it you are in need of encouragement
today, I want you to know that I have, in part at least, sat where you sit.
  My home began to fall apart when I was a young teenager. Eventually my
parents divorced. In those days divorce simply was not accepted as readily
as it is today and I felt terribly ashamed. I felt very much rejected by
my father and ended up rejecting him, which left me feeling very insecure.
  And when it comes to doing wrong, I've committed enough sins to know that
I am less than perfect. I've known what it is to struggle in business and
verge on going under. I've also felt at times like leaving my wife, as she
has me. And I've known years of family sickness and disaster too.
  I can't say that I like trouble. Neither am I a good sufferer. But this
one thing I know: you and I can rise above our failures, misfortunes or
circumstances.
  Walt Disney turned his childhood nightmare into a beautiful dream, which
in turn became a reality. You and I can do the same, too, if we want to
badly enough and will persevere.
  Not that it comes easily. It rarely does. It didn't for Walt Disney either.
Apparently he went broke seven times and had a nervous breakdown before
he realized his dreams and became successful.
  Here's how you, too, can be successful:
  First, accept yourself as human. Realize that it's all right to fall or
to fail. It's all part of the human experience. You don't have to be perfect
to be a worthwhile person. You just need to be you.
  Second, when you fall don't stay down. Recognize that the only real failure
is not to get up once more than you've either fallen or been knocked down.
       

</subsample>
