Re-creating Clayton House by Mark Paterson  

Clayton House is a tribute to its builder. It stands proud, on the eastern
outskirts of Perth, still in its basic structure, surrounded by almost 11
hectares of fertile land. The Helena River forms one boundary of the property.
  The house was completed in 1861, signified by initials of the then-owners
of Clayton Farm, the Smith family, engraved into the brickface on the
north-west wall.
  But two-storey brick house, built with red clay dug from a nearby 
creek, is not the farm's original homestead which was on the banks of the Helena
River. The wooden building is believed to have burnt down.
  The land around the house was originally taken up by Henry Camfield,
a hops farmer from Kent, England, who arrived on the "Caroline" in 1829.
He was granted 1100 acres at Helena and soon after leased out the land.
  The present owners Mr and Mrs David Dick presume the farm was named after
the man who took up the first lease from Camfield, but they are unsure.
  In 1853, the farm was bought by Richard Smith and not long after he and
his family moved to the property.
  The nearest settlement was Guildford, so the Smith family was almost
self-sufficient - wheat and oats were grown, an orchard with vines and many
fruit trees decorated the farm. Pigs and chickens were also kept.
  Over the years the land has been used for a number of purposes, particularly
agisting stock driven down from northern cattle stations.
  Mr and Mrs Dick bought Clayton Farm from Elders Goldsborough Mort in 1968
and they moved onto the farm in 1972. The pastoral agents had acquired the
farm and surrounding land for stock agistment and later subdivided and
sold it off.
  Clayton Farm remains the largest of the subdivisions on the east side
of Helena River. Clayton House was used by stockmen when the land was agisting
stock and the room above the cellar in the back garden was also used to
house workmen.
  According to Mrs Dick, the house is structurally sound and little has
been spent on it internally but she pointed out that it was "very drab"
when they bought it.
  She said dust was continually falling from the ceiling and walls, from
cooking black, caused by the stockmen cooking on a wood stove in the original
living room.
  So she and her husband set out to make the place liveable.
  "We cleaned the place up and put in a tenant and then worked out what
we wanted to do with the place," said Mr Dick.
  Now retired, the Dicks made all efforts to furnish the house with period
furniture and had hoped from the start to renovate it to its original
splendour.  
  When the couple lived in South Perth, they were accustomed to a larger
living area than Clayton House had and so decided to extend the existing
living area out to the original kitchen.
  However, their plans were way-laid until they could find bricks from the
same period and of the same size to complete the addition.
  This task ended when a cottage in nearby Guildford was demolished. Although
the bricks were the same size, they had marginally different texture to
those in Clayton House.
  The bricklayers had to finish off the bricks just as the original ones
have been. During renovations the external brickwork was treated with a
water repelling solution.
  The original kitchen, separate from the house, had deteriorated and the
original brickwork to the baker's oven was discovered during the extensions.
  Doors and windows were bought when they became available. Most of the
windows were replaced with pane and a half windows, a fashion of the 1850s,
according to Mrs Dick.
  Mr Dick said it was a matter of buying the materials you liked when you
were able and then using them at a later date.
  "Get it when you can and then decide how to use it," he said, adding that
period materials were becoming scarcer.
  Clayton House is classified by the National Trust and is open only to
historical societies and specialised groups.
  Mrs Dick is president of the Swan-Guilford Historical Society, 
reflecting her keen interest in the region's past.
  "I have always been interested in history and we have always like old
furniture," she said, "Most of our furniture was acquired in the days when
it was not too popular."
  The furniture, such as the early jarrah colonial settees in the living
room, is mainly Victorian.
  There are cedar chairs in the upstairs' bedrooms along with Victorian
brass beds that came from an early commercial hotel when it was pulled down.
  Raw iron gates that mark the main entrance came from the Mechanics Institute
in Perth, when it was demolished.
  The doors and architraves in the house came out from England; with
fingerplates being saved from old homes around Perth. An original lock is
set into the front door.
  The staircase is original with only the treads being replaced during
renovations. 
  In fact the staircase, which starts behind the front door, is so tight
that when the Dicks moved large furniture upstairs, they had to take it
through upstairs windows.
  All the door-frames are original and all light fittings come from the
1850s.
  The plasterwork in the house is also original. It was steam cleaned and
painted over. The wood stove in the living room has been replaced by a
Victorian fireplace from the demolished Guildford cottage.
  There is one other Victorian fireplace in a bedroom but the parlour at
the front of the house still contains an original fire surround.
  The parlour is also home to a Victorian suite brought from England.
  Mrs Dick said the house was returned as nearly as possible to its original
splendour but she pointed out some things could just not be replaced.
  The home is adorned by etchings, paintings and ornaments, many of which
depict WA life in days gone by.
  There is a full size cellar out the back of the house which has a room
over the top. The Dicks suspect it was used as a bedroom for the settler's
family and then later as a dog and fowl pen.
  Shingles cover the verandah off the bedroom and the nearby garage roof.
  The cellar's entrance is guarded by two jarrah doors, both of which were
beyond resurrection when the Dicks bought the farm. The cellar was flooded
regularly in winter and this forced the couple to dig in an automatic pump
to keep the floor dry. The cellar is now used as a meat cellar and for general
storage.
  The original grape vines on the north-east wall have been pruned and now
bear fruit regularly and there are huge trees all over the 11 hectare block
including some original growths. Plant regeneration has been an important
part of Clayton Farm's renovation with dying original trees being replaced
and more trees added.
  The one remaining mulberry tree still bears and an olive tree marks the
site of the original homestead.
  There are three original wells and an all year spring. One of the wells
alongside the house was used as a dry well to take up water from the kitchen
but it has since been renovated using local stone and is now not used.
  The couple's eldest son grows special varieties of Kangaroo paws on a
half hectare plot for an export market while the younger son manages a
thoroughbred agistment operation on another part of the farm.
  The house has hosted two gatherings of the Smith family, descendants
of the pioneering family who built Clayton House.
  With a home garden, orchard, several head of cattle and small flock of
cross-bred sheep, the Dicks believe they are self-sufficient- another link
with the original settlers.
         
