The tunas of Moreton Bay by Darryl Steel  

Despite the abuses we heap upon them, the big bays that adjoin our major
cities still fish remarkably well. Moreton Bay is no exception, and the
numerous schools of tuna that call it home make it heaven on earth for the
spinmen.

The midday summer sun is blazing down and I am seated in the shade of a
paperbark tree on Moreton Island enjoying an ice cold stubbie. Because of
the glare on the water, I can't see the mainland. What joy! What
I can see however, is the early run of longtail tuna feeding on the edge
of the channel in front of our camp. Crash - Bang - Bash! - spray lofts
into the air. The poor baitfish appear as jewels as the sun strikes their
bodies while they dance through the air in hope of escaping from the predators.
I wish them luck. It was obvious the tide had started to ebb.
  If it wasn't so hot, I'd hop into our boat anchored out front, grab some
poppers and high speed lures and go out for a belt. Oh well, maybe they
will still be there when that big red ball reclines a little.
  This scene has caused me to reflect on how lucky us Brisbanites are to
have an island such as Moreton close to the mainland with such GREAT fishing
water.
  Sure, this is the time of the small black marlin, sailfish, wahoo and
dolphin just out from Cape Moreton, but with the weather being as fickle
as it is, it is not always possible to venture out into that magic blue
water in a small boat. It is also not everyone's inclination to go outside,
but they might wish to fish for honest gamefish within the bay proper. Each
year, longtails, mack tuna, frigates, Watson's leaping bonito, Australian
bonito and the odd stripie are available. Yellowfin tend to stay offshore
in the blue water and it is here you may be lucky to score the unusual (to
us) members of the tribe like dogtooth, big eye and albacore.
  We have found that not a month goes by when at least one of the tribe
cannot be captured or seen within the confines of Moreton Bay.
  Experience has shown that the tunas available to us are very critical
of presentation because of their feeding habits. As a general rule, they
tend to feed on what is considered small baitfish, tucking into hardiheads
down to 1/2" minnows. I am aware some feed on gar, sauries scad etc., but
that is dependent on the bait available at the time and the areas they are
observed in.
 In our Bay, 99 times out of 100 they feed on super small baitfish and it
is up to us, the anglers, to either change their feeding habit or present
something that resembles the bait they are feeding upon.
  Firstly, let's deal with the one that grows the largest in the Bay, the
longtail. School fish tend to be in the 7-11 kg bracket and as such, are
the most common size caught. We usually use 4 or 6 kg spin outfits with
stiff powerful rods.
  This past season provided some action packed days with these great sportfish
and one that comes to mind was with my mate Gordon Fallon. One autumn morning
saw Gordon and myself cruising across the bay with just a gentle south wester
up our tail. The day looked great, clear skies and a good weather forecast
combined with an early 2.2 metre high tide. Experience has shown the falling
tide, preferably in the morning, is best as a general rule.
  The area we intended to fish was known locally as `the paddock', an open
expanse of water between Mud and Moreton Islands.
  We must have been 3 kilometres out before we noticed some terns working
a certain area. Our eyes strained against the early morning glare to see
if the birds were following tuna or just picking up food from a flotsam
line. About 100 metres from them, the motor was shut off and we waited.
Nothing happened for five minutes and then the longtails commenced feeding.
Before the motor was started, the tuna sounded and the water calmed off
once more.
  Gordon said "Boy that was quick."
  I answered "They were the two seconds specials." Anyone who has chased
tuna will know the feeling. Sometimes they'll surface feed for such a short
time you don't have time to fire off a cast, even if you are close enough.
The school did this twice more, so we continued on our bearing. Another
kilometre furher and we found what we were looking for. The sight that greeted
us was a feeding frenzy that would quicken the heartbeat of the most seasoned
angler. A large school of longtails had rounded some frogmouth pilchards
into a ball and were charging relentlessly through them. The baitfish were
trying to fly in the air to escape the predators but the longtails knew
this game only too well.
 The two Fallon poppers landed in unison. Their skipping, dancing, splashing
action across the surface drew an instant response. Double hookup. After
a short run, the one connected to my line pulled out, but Gordon's stayed
firm. Being his first tuna, Gordon was amazed at the amount of line he was
rapidly losing. "You'd better get the boat going Steely," he yelled. On
checking the spool on his large spinning reel I knew he still had plenty
of line left, so I suggested we remain stationary and hope that the tuna
would stop in another 50 metres or so. It did. The daggy grin on Gordon's
face told its own story. Here was this character on his first tuna and on
one of his own lures and brother, he was ecstatic. Orders and questions flowed
fast and furiously from my mate.
  "You'd better chase this fish! Look at the angle of this line, it must
be in New Zealand! Hurry up Steel get your bum into gear!" And then "What
do I do now!" After its big run, the longtail had stopped some 200 metres
out and appeared still. With that amount of line out, the stretch in 6 kg
line is considerable and it wasn't until Gordon had taken care of the stretch
that he turned the fish. It came slowly, but surely towards the boat.
  It was another 10 minutes before colour showed, some 20 metres out. When
the fish sighted the boat, it panicked and bolted into the depths. (At close
quarters, tuna often sound. I put it down to boat shadow probably resembling
a shark. Sharks are common in tuna season and sharks love tuna steaks).
Gordon spent the next 10 minutes trying to emulate Deek doing an anticlockwise
marathon man, circumnavigating the five metre centre console. Eventually
the longtail was tailed and hoisted aboard. The first good fish is always
exciting, and this capture was no exception.
  We landed a few more tuna that day, all swimming away sporting little
yellow streamers, but there was one fish that provided the main course for
a small version of Jaws. This fish had taken a popper, and I was fishing
it hard on a brute of a rod, when it decided to imitate a guided missile.
This little escapade was brought about by the 2.4 metres of teeth hard on
its tail. Two seconds later there was nothing left bar a rasped double.
  Although on this particular day, the poppers were great, there are other
days when small metal lures retrieved at high speed will outdo the 
poppers, so it is necessary to try both. If one fails, try the other, although,
I always start off with a popper. Being an exciter type lure, it will quite
often cause a hookup even when the longtails are feeding on small baitfish.
There is quite a lot of difference in profile between a 4 cm baitfish and
a 12 cm popper.
  The longtails must surely have the widest water temperature tolerance
of all the tunas as we have captured them in every month of the year although
Dec-May is prime time. One day, my wife Nikki and myself were out chasing
yellowtail kings at a local haunt when I made one of my most unusual longtail
captures. The kings were periodically banging on the surface adjacent to
a shipping beacon. We had landed a few on poppers when a 20 kg plus tuna
broke the surface right in the middle of the 4-5 kg kings. Next cast, my
popper was engulfed by what I assumed was a king. It was a close encounter
with no mad runs but after 10 minutes on heavy gear, I began to wonder about
its birth line. At 20 minutes the head shaking felt through the rod told
me it was not in fact, a yellowtail, but what could it be? When it started
circling the boat, I said to Nikki "I think its a longtail tuna" and sure
enough it was. At over 13 kg, it was not big by live bait standards, but
still a top fish. It was a strange feeling to land a longtail while wearing
tracksuit and wet weather gear instead of the customary shorts and t-shirt.
This tuna was landed in a surface water temperature of below 16°C on 
my gauge, whereas a few months before, the surface temperature in Moreton Bay
was 23.5 to 26°C.
  Don't these tuna know they are supposed to be in warmer waters now? A
typical case of rules broken by the fish. They never seem to comprehend
man made rules or conditions. Regularly, we find a species turning up when
you least expect them. Is it that some fish have a greater temperature
tolerance than we are led to believe, or is it that currents change more
frequently?
  To me, this is part of the mystique of fishing.
  Mackerel tuna (or kawakawa as they are known internatonally) are a speedster,
no matter whether they are 1 kg or 10 kg in weight. This particular tuna
is not supposed to grow over 12 kg, according to the text books. They are
a regular visitor to Moreton Bay mainly in the 1 kg-3 kg size, but during
October and November the heavies arrive. They can be very spooky and extremely
difficult to approach, but when the gods are with you they provide spectacular
action.
  I have found the smaller mack's are susceptible to small metal lures like
stingsildas and small mavericks, while the o/s ones will take both poppers
and small metal lures.
  Last November, Leon Abrahams and I went out for a run and found some of
the larger mack tuna on the boil. It was early in the morning and we landed
three or four from 7.6 kg to 8.5 kg before they became spooky as the sun
rose. This was a day when small poppers reigned supreme. It may have been
necessary to re-position the boat numerous times to get into the right spot
for a cast, but the results were worthwhile. On poppers or small metal lures,
these top gamefish perform as well as longtails and I feel are faster on
their first sprint and at their ability to change direction. At this stage,
it's worth mentioning that tuna fishing is not a lazy man's sport. Sometimes
it may be necessary to position your boat numerous times and this could mean
up to 40-50 changes to allow just ONE cast that MAY be successful. I can
recall early in my tuna fishing career, chasing mack tuna all day and ending
up with only three or four casts that would have finished up in the strike
zone. My wife reckons that all tuna are employed by B.P. and Shell oil
companies because when she comes out tuna chasing, we seem to chase them
all day. Perseverance is the name of the game, and experience may allow
up to a dozen hook ups in a morning.

