Thoughts of a landscape artist By Marjory Penglase  

This painter uses a variety of mediums and careful study over long periods
for success.

  Painting is a totally personal activity - you and the subject, your reaction
to form, colour, light effects and the infinite combinations thereof. The
translation of that reaction into your chosen medium.
  Everyone, in time, works out their own approach, based on experience;
one's own and shared experience with other painters. Always there is something
new to learn, even if it's a simpler way of carrying your gear.
  I work in both oils and watercolours, mostly landscape; with the subject
dictating the medium for the finished painting. However, when travelling
I find watercolour, either alone or in combination with oil pastel and
assorted pens and pencils to be the most convenient.
  If there is time, one can settle down to some thoughtful painting, if
not, then the materials are equally suitable for quick impressions, perhaps
supported by photographs. Whatever the conditions, I think it is important
to spend as much time as possible contemplating the subject. Perhaps make
a thumbnail sketch or two, simplify shapes and tone patterns.
  Once you begin painting, the details will come sneaking in thick and fast,
clutter up your composition and confuse and obscure the very elements
which attracted you in the first place. So you need to keep a clear pattern
in your mind. This is even more essential if you are making sketches for
a large work to be painted in the studio. I usually make a number of colour
notes with watercolours and or oil pastels. (Perhaps I should explain that
the oil pastels are used for their `resist' quality  e.g. in a low toned
area I can fill in detail with the oilpastel and then wash over it as
necessary.) I also make as many detailed drawings of trees, rocks, foliage
etc. as time permits. Sometimes one of these will "come off" well enough
to find its way onto an exhibition wall. The majority go into the reference
"pool", enabling me, when back home to analyse and study the accumulated work
and select for the planned painting.
  For this, my first step is to make a pencil or charcoal drawing in which
all the shapes are reduced to simple geometric forms, to tighten the
composition and build an effective balance of tones. I spend a good deal
of time on these preliminaries, a project will often stay on "simmer" for
months until the ideas seem fully developed.
  Then, with the decks cleared, I put the studies to one side, handy when
needed but not too obvious, so as to try and avoid the inhibitions inherent
in working from notes, the great hazard being that the picture tends to
become tight and stilted, losing the spontaneity and excitement of the original
sketch.
  Having built up a strong mental image I do very little drawing on the
board, just charge in with big washes to establish the dominant tones and
colours, mostly sticking to the old principle of starting with sky and
background and working forward. Always trying to keep uppermost in my mind
my first reaction to the subject, with all the subsequent studies and diagrams
being a means to an end.
  It is necessary to endeavour to remain flexible enough to use or adapt
"happy accidents" - particularly important with that wayward and unforgiving
medium, water colour.
  As for "unhappy" accidents, know yee that everyone has them and they
far outnumber the happy ones! With most paintings, there comes a stage where
the best laid plans go wrong and all the helpful theories are of no help.
Unless you feel very confident about getting back on course, it is generally
wise to put the painting aside for a while, looking and pondering until
another solution presents itself.
  Another situation, where it often pays to take a tea break is when you
think a picture is finished but just can't restrain the urge to keep on fiddling
round trying to "improve" this and that. In no time at all, something that
may have been alright is muddied beyond redemption. It is much safer to come 
back with the mind and eye rested and review the whole thing.
  This is especially important with water colour where all the luminosity
can be lost in the course of a few minutes lack of concentration.
  With oils, it is easier to bury the mistakes under a layer of paint, but
even so, I've found that their ghosts tend to hang around and haunt you.
  It is always worthwhile experimenting with different materials and
combinations and with variety and challenge in your subjects a daisy can
present as many difficulties as a mountain top. So never, never sink into
a comfortable rut - try something different now and again. Oil pastels,
used alone or in combination with watercolour or pencils can be guaranteed
to jolt anyone out of a rut. Effective on paper, they can also be used
on canvas and blended with turps.
  There are all sorts of interesting coloured pencils, pens, chalks etc.
available. It is not necessary to buy large, expensive boxes. Most art
stores sell single sticks and a few basic colours are all that are needed.
  I prefer a fairly limited palette no matter what medium I am using. I
vary it according to the subject, but try to keep to about four colours,
two warm, two cool, plus white if I am using oils. I do not as a rule, have
black. I prefer to mix my own darks. This is just a personal thing. Painters
have argued the pros and cons of black for years. Once, there were sound,
technical reasons for regarding some blacks with suspicion, this, of course,
is no longer the case. So it all comes back to what works best for you.
  Generally speaking, painters are in two broad groups - "line" people
and "mass" people. The former, tend to see things in outline, draw reasonably
well and have problems with colour and the organization of shapes i.e.
compostion. The latter, have good colour sense and feeling for the solid
forms and "masses" in a subject, but are a little shaky on draughtsmanship.
Whatever ones strengths or weaknesses, draw at every opportunity.
Little sketch pads and pencils left around the house in stragetic 
places mean that with something right to hand, you really do a drawing of that
milk bottle, a light effect, or an idea you have just had, instead of merely
thinking of it. It helps sharpen your observation, helps your painting and
is a source of pleasure and stimulation.

