<subsample>
	<id> E15b </id>
	


	<source> Encore - March 13-26, 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Gillian Armstrong's account of Bob Dylan in Australia is not your
average concert film </h>
	


	<misc> Making Bob Dylan's 56-minute concert film in Sydney turned out to be an
entertainment industry event LOUISE McELVOGUE reports. </misc>
	

IT WAS a project which brought the most influential international musician
of the last half-century together with some of the most highly-regarded
names in the Australian film industry.
  The making of a film of Bob Dylan and Tom Petty and The Heartbreakers
in concert involved director Gillian Armstrong, producer Greg Ricketson,
cinematographer Don McAlpine and sound engineer Roger Savage.
 The film, recording a tour that only ran in Australia and New Zealand,
is for American cable network Home Box Office. It was shot at the Sydney
Entertainment Centre over three days, with seven camera crews shooting a
massive 20 miles of film.
  Armstrong, whose credits include a clip for Pat Wilson's &quot;Bop Girl&quot; as
well as the features My Brilliant Career, Starstruck and Mrs Soffel, was
approached by Dylan's management earlier this year.
 &quot;Dylan and his manager approached my agent because they'd seen my work
and they liked it,&quot; she said. &quot;I wanted to shoot the concert because it
was a challenge, but I said to Dylan I can only do it if I get a good team
around me.&quot;
  Armstrong approached McAlpine, who worked with her on My Brilliant Career,
to direct photography and Greg Ricketson to produce the film.
  Armstrong regarded filming Dylan live as a &quot;special&quot; project. &quot;It was
a huge logistical exercise and I was lucky to get someone as capable as
Greg Ricketson to co-ordinate,&quot; she said. &quot;It was a fantastic team - the
best gathering of Australian camera people under one roof.&quot;
  Recruiting was a mammoth task for Ricketson's company, Anglo Street Films,
with only one month for pre-production. Co-ordinator of the film, Julie
Forster, rang around and found out who was available. With crew juggling
other production schedules, Ricketson and Armstrong were able to come up
with the strong final crew.
  Preparation started with Ricketson, McAlpine and Armstrong watching Dylan's
concerts in Wellington, Melbourne and earlier concerts in Sydney. The camera
operators also attended the Sydney concerts to discuss angles and shots
with McAlpine and Armstrong.
  Dylan's concert repertoire in Australia included a healthy crosssection
of material from the different periods of his career. He and Armstrong
decided on 22 of the 31 tracks in the concert for filming, including duets
with Tom Petty and the band.
  Dylan's final two Sydney concerts, on February 24 and 25 were then shot.
The crew's*crews' only rehearsal was in the sound check before the first 
concert.
  During the day of the second concert, the crew shot close-ups and cut-aways
of Dylan's backing singers. The next day was a seven-hour shoot of Dylan,
Petty and The Heartbreakers' close-ups.
  The atmosphere in the Entertainment Centre on that day was almost reverent.
  The stage was smokily lit and the rest of the cavernous auditorium was
in near-darkness. The quality the playback sound and the crew's spontaneous
applause after some takes made it seem as though Dylan was actually playing
to 10,000 people.
  After reports of his lack of co-operation at his press conference, Dylan
was disappointingly well-behaved. He conferred with Armstrong between takes
or smoked, while quietly listening to playbacks of songs he has been singing
for 20 years.
  To the observor, Armstrong appeared to have established a rapport with
Dylan. The director herself said the working relationship was easier because
both knew and respected the other's work.
  &quot;It was like making a film with anyone,&quot; Armstrong said. &quot;You hope they
can trust you and take your advice on the way things should be shot, but
it takes time to build up that relationship. I think with Dylan that took
a bit longer.
  &quot;My brief from Bob was to shoot the concert so it didn't look like standard
live footage (although) it's difficult to shoot six people on stage and
make them look unlike any other six people performing.&quot;
  Armstrong said they avoided having operators with hand-held cameras rushing
around on stage. Instead, the production &quot;set up a lot of different angles
and got a lot of movement in the shots&quot;.
  &quot;We could only get away with intruding on stage that much because it
was Dylan who commissioned the concert.&quot;
  Armstrong said she understood why Sydney audiences at Dylan's concerts
may have felt distanced but blamed it on the nature of the Entertainment
Centre.
 &quot;You really have to be in the first few rows to enjoy concerts at that
venue,&quot; she said. &quot;Bob's not Bruce Springsteen and I don't think he has
to leap around the stage. It's his lyrics that are important. What we saw
through the cameras looked fantastic.&quot;
  The camera operators included Louis Irving, Tony Wilson, Danny Batterham,
Nixon Binney, Peter Menzies, Peter Levy and Kim Batterham.
  The concerts were shot with a Louma crane extending from the back of the
stage and two cameras tracking along either side. Another two cameras were
static - one close to the right hand side of the stage and the other half-way
down the auditorium. Armstrong also used a roving camera to shoot different
angles from the back of the venue.
  A video camera was set up behind the mixing desk with a wide shot of the
stage. This was for continuity in editing and the control-room monitor.
Armstrong directed from a control room backstge, where she had this wide
shot and three other cameras monitored.
  AAV supplied the wide-shot colour video camera and had time code burnt
into the image. The video also recorded a mono track of the camera operators'
talk-back for editing.
  Samuelson Film Service supplied the shoot with seven Panaflex 35mm cameras,
four of which had video splits, and five zoom lenses. A Panaglide (floating
camera system which moves smoothly with the operator), was used during the
February 25 concert on stage and also to shoot Dylan heading from the
Entertainment Centre to his car.                                       
  Armstrong used the Louma crane on both Sydney nights and extensive tracking
shots to give a sense of movement to the film and avoid the static style
of traditional live footage.
  As Ricketson said: &quot;With the standard rock concert you work out four to
five camera positions, set them up and roll with maybe a few hand-held cameras
on stage. You get your standard static shots.
  &quot;Gillian approached the concert as she would any other film project -
that's what will make the difference.&quot;
 The crew shot 63,000 feet of film on February 24 and the processing involved
made it impossible to see rushes before shooting the following night's concert
or any of the close-ups.
  Armstrong covered herself well by shooting with this much film and left
the decision on which songs would be static, moving or in close-up until
editing.                                       
  Dylan's singers were filmed in close-up with two static cameras and a
camera tracking across the stage for two hours.
  For the Dylan and Petty close-ups, extra scaffolding was set up at the
end of the stage and a circular track was built around it.
  Two cameras moved on the track and another two with zoom lenses were set
on ramps in front of the stage.
  Several of the songs Dylan and Petty performed were chosen for close-ups.
Dylan listened to the tracks he needed to mime for close-ups twice before
shooting.
  For continuity, two of the crew chain-smoked centre stage to recreate
the smoky atmosphere of some of the footage.


</subsample>
