Personality profile By John McTavish Hidden out in Castle Hill is a hi-fi and video store known only as J McT's.
Customers of the store know that the initials stand for John McTavish, but
few of them would be aware that they're buying from someone who's built,
serviced and sold hi-fi equipment, as well as created the music which goes
through it. And only industry stalwarts would know that John is one of the
longest serving hi-fi personalities in the game...  

John left school in 1963 or 64, (he can't remember exactly which year) and
went straight into training as a technical officer with AWV, the Amalgamated
Wireless Valve company, now better known as AWA Thorn. As a part of his
training, he was required to complete the Electronics and Communications
Certificate. `I did my time in QC (Quality Control), in the manufacture of
valves' he told me `There's not a lot of people making valves anymore'.
  He didn't quite complete the course because at the end of Stage 3 he was
offered a job by Phil Drioni, who was at that time running an extremely
successful company called Fisonic Industries, which manufactured guitar
amplifiers. `They were a real success story for Australian industry' recalls
John `There was Moody, and Fisonic. Before he moved to a factory, I used
to build the amplifiers in his garage during the day and Phil would sell
and deliver them at night.'
  From there John went to Arrow Electronics, where he worked for Roy
Fitzsimmons. `Most people in the industry worked for Roy at some stage
of their career' he says with a laugh `Roy used to make microphones and
radios - in fact he made the first microphone in Australia, which is how
he became involved with Shure.'
  John was employed as a salesman and he remembers that Nick Atkins
interviewed him for the job. He asked me what I'd done, and when I told
him I'd worked for AWV and Fisonic in the six years since I'd left school
he said "You move around a lot, don't you".
  As it turned out, both Nick and John left Arrow at the same time, and
started Kent Hi-Fi, in partnership with Max Roberts. `Nick and Max were
the partners' says John. `I just wired up the store comparators and did
the general work.' Soon after, John left Kent and spent six years as a
professional musician `I was a drummer, so you'd better put the word musician
in inverted commas' he advised me with a grin. He worked in such venues
as the Bunny Club and the Mayfair Hotel. His most vivid memory of the time
was that every place he worked was pulled down shortly afterwards. `Even
after I left Instrol they pulled it down' he laughed.
  Music wasn't paying too well, so John joined Angus and Coote, working
in the hearing aid department.  He completed a course in audiometry to
help with the job.  `Repairing hearing aids is like standing a bull elephant
on an IC' he says.  John found it all interesting and feels that the
understanding he gained of the human ear during his time at Angus and Coote
was of enormous use to him in later years.
  From there John joined Racal Engineering and was placed in charge of a
production line for `Squad Call Transceivers'.  It was all military equipment
and John remembers the quality control as being absolutely unbelievable.
His favourite story concerns the girls who used to work on the line.  `We
had to fight a constant battle against static electricity, and many of the
girls had to wear wrist straps, which I'm sure they didn't understand. 
But one of the things we had to ask when a problem cropped up was whether
they were wearing nylon underwear - and that certainly led to some funny
scenes!' He had other problems on the line, with the girls always trying
to do neat work.  `You'd design a 75 mm wire to lead to the channel change
switch, but it would appear to be too long so the girls would strip it back
and all of a sudden you wouldn't be receiving the channel any more.  It
was critical stuff'.
  John went from Racal to Sydney Hi-Fi, which was then owned by W.C.
Wedderspoon, of which Max Roberts was the managing director.  `After a short
time in retail I was shifted to the wholesale operation, which at that time
had the agencies for Monarch, Bose and Acoustic Research, plus some pretty
fancy professional stuff like Eventide and Clockworks.'
  John was sent off to generate some interstate business, and one night
he called Max from Adelaide. `I told him to send down some help, because
I'd sold a system to Adelaide's Festival Theatre, which at the time would
have been Australia's prestige venue.  They had Altec 2228 multi-cellular
horns and some Philips 40 cubic foot bass bins.  The sound engineer wanted
to put in AR LSTs because he'd heard that they were used at Covent Garden.
They didn't have enough money for the ARs so we put in four pairs of 901s
strapped together and hung out of the ceiling.'  
  `Everybody, just everybody was saying that "bloody hi-fi speakers will
never work in a professional installation" but when we tested it, the
coverage was incredibly even over the hall, which was what they wanted.'
  Soon after, John was lured back to retail by Roger Graham who asked him
to open an Instrol store at Eastwood, which is now an Audiocom store.  He
then went back to Adelaide, to set up an Instrol store in that city before
going on to do a stint as general manager of Instrol for a period of 12
months.
  Moving back into wholesale again, he spent three months with Ben Douglas,
as sales manager for Crown (now Amcron), RTR and Linear Design in NSW and
Queensland.  The reason for his short tenure was an offer which was `too
good to refuse' from Eric Selwood, who made him a director of Electrovoice
Australia during its initial setting-up period.
  It was actually John's father who prompted his next move.  `Dad came into
my office one day with a cutting from the Sydney Morning Herald saying that
Dr Amar Bose would be in Australia looking for a new agent.  I had met
Amar previously, so I left a note advising him that if he thought I could
be of any asistance to him, to give me a ring.  I actually had no intention
of going for the agency because I had no money and no chance of financial
backing.'                 
  Dr Bose, after approaches from various people, including representatives
from some large companies, was apparently unhappy with the response to
the advertisement and invited John to lunch.  One thing led to another and,
at a point during the lunch John found he was the new managing director
of Bose Australia.  `I remember Amar's words vividly' says John.  `He looked
up from the proposal I'd put together at his request and he said "Can you
be in Boston on the 12th?", I'd never been out of Australia before and didn't
even know whether I had a passport or not.  Sure enough, two weeks later
I was in Boston.'
  `When I returned, I received a call from my bank manager asking if I knew
that someone had deposited $20,000 in my bank account.  So Bose Australia
started from my home at Carlingford, with just myself, my wife Annette,
Dave Bell and a photocopier.'
  The team obviously worked well, because after just eleven months, Bose
Australia moved into a large complex in Rydalmere, which is still its present
location.  Even the factory is interesting, because it was a sheltered workshop
for Rydalmere Psychiatric Centre where the workers used to package garlic
salt.   `Garlic must be good for you' says John `because the cockroaches
were really tough.  It took us years to kill them!'
  In fact Bose Australia, under John's direction, was listed as the fastest
growing Bose subsidiary in the world.  It was so successful that Amar Bose
returned to Australia to discuss the possibility of John moving to the
United States.  John had two (then) teenage daughters, a young son and close
family ties, so he thought about it for a long time.  What finally decided
him was a single morning when he flew back into Australia. 'I looked out
the window of the Qantas jumbo, and it was a bright, beautiful sunny day
and I suddenly knew that I wouldn't want to live anywhere else in the world.'
  John is a showman at heart, and it wasn't surprising that he began to
get an itch to get back into retail.  He resigned from Bose and bought a
major share of DME Hi-Fi, from Roger Manning.  DME was then operating two
stores, one in Bondi, in Sydney's eastern suburbs, and the other in the
centre of the city, in George St.  `The city was a terrible place to work'
he told me.  `In one six month period we had eight break and enters.  I
was called out once on Christmas Eve and once on Boxing Day and lived in
constant terror of people stealing things from the shop'.
  In all there were four partners in DME, which John felt was unwieldy and,
after the company opened a branch at Castle Hill, he decided leave DME, buy 
the Castle Hill store, and rename it J.McT's.  With his background in the 
business, he injected some interesting philosophies into the store. He 
carries only three loudspeaker brands - Bose, JBL and Mordaunt-Short - and 
says these will cater for all tastes.  As far as electronics are concerned 
he plugs for Kenwood and Akai.                
  J.McT's sells both audio and video because `What we're really in is the
entertainment industry, and not much different from the local club, where
you go to see an act.  We're just trying to bring music and pictures into
the home in as realistic a manner as possible.          
  `You're looking at two senses, the ears and the eyes' says John, `and of
the two I believe that the ears are the more critical.  You can get away with
fairly ordinary video components and a good hi-fi system much better than
you can get away with good quality video components and a poor hi-fi system.'
  John runs a video library to service the people to whom he's sold VCRs
and believes that honesty in retailing breeds long term clientele.  `I tell
people about all new technology' he said.  `When hi-fi video was just around
the corner I told my customers that they'd be better off waiting a few
months before buying.  A lot of retailers carry so much stock that they
can't afford to do that, they have to take the sale.  I don't think that's
right.                                                   
  John feels that the hi-fi industry has suffered under the Trade Practices, in particular the retail price maintenance clauses.  'If a customer
can just move from shop to shop, trying to get lower and lower prices, he'll
eventually run into someone who'll just lie about a product, or sell something
totally unsuitable, just to make the sale.'                     
  `The trick for any customer, no matter what they're buying, is to put
their trust in one person, an expert, rather than in an advertising claim,
a brand or whatever' says John.  He doesn't expect, however, that a customer
should be too trusting at first, `that's why we offer a money-back guarantee
on any product we recommend - that we've chosen for a customer.'
  With Bose, JBL and Mordaunt-Short peakers, the philosophy is carried even
further, because if a custmer buys a pair of speakers, there is a 12 month
period of grace during which the speakers can be upgraded, with the full
purchase price of the original loudspeakers being credited towards the
new speakers.                                            
  `If a customer can't decide between two pairs of speakers in the showroom'
says John, `all we do is tell him to buy the cheaper pair.        
                
