<subsample>
	<id> E17b </id>
	


	<source> National Dog - November 1986 </source>
	                                                         


	<h> Canine Heartworm disease spreads Australia wide </h>
	


	<bl> by Dr R B Atwell BVSc MACVSc PhD </bl>
	

MOST ALARMING feature of canine heartworm disease in Australia is that it
is now much more widely spread than was initially realise.  A recent survey
Australia-wide has revealed that even remote areas like Alice Springs and
northern Western Australia have become infected. Generally the disease
is spread widely throughout Queensland (except in tableland areas) and
similarly in New South Wales. In fact, some areas of Sydney now report a
50% infection rate.                                     
  Local infection rates (eg in your town or suburb) do depend on factors like
mosquito type, infection rate, flight ranges, access to infected dogs, abuse
of/or no use of prophylactic therapy etc. Even so, the spread of the disease
has been quite spectacular and resembles the situation in the USA.
  Two factors are associated with the spread: 1) The fact that dogs in our
modern society are more mobile (holidays, shows etc.) and can conceivably
infect a resident non-infected mosquito population should they themselves
be infected; and 2) It is believed that the mosquito has learnt to adapt
to colder climates and therefore the infected (with heartworm) mosquito
is now believed to be able to survive longer in colder weather and so pass
on the infection when it next feeds on a dog. Also the type of mosquitoes
that are now known to be capable of carrying the infection have been
increased.                                               
  Thus it is believed that the disease is being spread by now mosquito
populations becoming infected with heartworm larvae and thus allowing their
passage to new non-infected dogs within their feeding area. In addition
to this is the increased awareness of the disease by both veterinarians
and the general public, particularly in areas previously believed to be
clear of the disease.

  How to stop the infection? Obviously, if mosquitoes are not present in your
area then your dog will not become infected. However, what about the holiday in
Queensland or the coast and the mosquitoes that they will have exposure to?
Prophylactic therapy is essential if access infected mosquitoes is possible. 
The drug of choice is diethyl carbamazine (DEC) and it must be given during 
the mosquito season and for at least two months after all mosquitoes have 
ceased activity or their exposure to dogs. In some areas this means that all 
year round therapy is necessary. So if you live in a non-infected area (Are you
sure? Ask your local veterinarian) and wish to travel to a potentially infected
area, eg Brisbane, for four weeks then your dog will need to be treated with 
DEC daily for three months to ensure protection. 
  What dose do you use? The minimum dose known to be effective is 5.5mg/kg body 
weight/day. Higher dose rates than this are quite safe (as DEC is an extremely
safe drug even with accidental intake by children) but you must ensure at 
least 5.5mg/kg/day. Care is also needed to allow for growth of your dog. So as 
your dog increases in size and weight you will need to ensure that you
appropriately increase the dose of DEC (a very common mistake). 
  If you are in an infected area DEC therapy will be necessary from 4-6 weeks 
of age (as soon as pups are able to take solids if not in mosquito proof 
quarters). The reason for this is complex and a part of the very unusual life 
cycle of heartworm. The dose of DEC you give today protects against, or kills,
the infection (larvae from the mosquito) the dog may have got one to two 
months previous, ie the infection picked up today will not be killed for one 
or two months provided the dog is dosed with DEC at the correct minimum dose 
rate daily during the period of time. Hence the reason for the need to give 
therapy for two months after the mosquito season is over. 
  What is new in drugs? New drugs (and different applications of existing 
drugs) are being tested in our research unit and several look promising both 
for killing worms and for stopping the clotting and inflammation that occurs 
in the lungs of infected dogs. However, the time between discovery of drugs 
and their development is prolonged. A new drug called Ivermectin holds a lot of
promise both in the treatment of the disease and in its prevention. However, 
this drug is not yet commercially available in Australia for heartworm. 
  New diagnostic aids have been developed. These blood tests help the clinician
to diagnose what is called `occult heartworm', ie where the disease is severe 
(lungs particularly are affected) but the routine blood tests for the presence 
of microfilariae (offspring of the adult worms) are inconclusive. Thus the
veterinarian now has a new diagnostic tool (called the ELISA test) to aid with
the diagnosis of the more unusual cases of heartworm. You may ask why is it so
difficult to diagnose. Usually it is relatively simple to do so, but the
disease is very complex and, as it affects so many organs in the body, can
sometimes be very difficult to diagnose accurately. Hence the need for ELISA
tests, radiology, blood tests, ECG and other aids in some cases of the disease.
  The DEC reaction - what is it? This is a severe shock reaction that can occur
in infected dogs that have microfilariae in their bloodstream. If you have a
dog and it is over six months of age and you live in an infected area it is
essential to have the dog blood tested prior to the use of DEC. 


</subsample>
