Camel trophy: trial by terrain  

Chris Mullett accompanies the field from Cairns to Darwin the hard way.

  An American executive of the massive R.J. Reynolds Tobacco empire described
the Camel Trophy as "encompassing the theme of man's adventure against the
environment." It's a great concept but mismanagement and disorganisation
spoilt the whole event.
  The aim of the Camel Trophy is nothing short of brilliant. Recruit two
man teams from 14 different countries, bring them together in tough terrain
and let them drive identical vehicles in a test of endurance and personal
ability.
  The Camel Trophy is supposedly the Rambo equivalent to outward bound training
courses. The route selected is presumed impassable and the teams competing
are expected to prove otherwise.
  With that sort of introduction you may be forgiven for expecting to find
Indiana Jones look-a-likes from 14 different nations gathering to compare
to muscle tone and macho appeal.
  The true story is somewhat different from the picture painted by the
corporate animals of the PR and Marketing departments. The heroes are not
after Harrison Ford's next starring role, they are just ordinary blokes.
  In previous years Camel Trophy venues have included Borneo, Sumatra, Zaire,
Papua New Guinea and Brazil. This year the choice was Australia and the
chance for the wet season of far north Queensland and the Northern Territory
to provide the drama.
  Getting selected for the event is a feat in itself, as over 500,000
applicants throughout the world compete for just 28 places. Professional
race and rally drivers are excluded and so too is anyone who had travelled
extensively in the area destined for the actual event.
  Having reduced the numbers from each country to three or four the organisers
sent the 1986 teams to England in the middle of winter. One week living
in a tent near the Welsh border was the nasty part but the fun part was
training with the Land Rover demonstration team in the intricacies of mud
recovery and vehicle winching techniques.
  It may seem difficult to relate the snow covered hills of England with
the bulldust of far north Queensland but many of the lessons learnt helped
the teams to compete in much safer fashion.
  The Australian team of Ron Begg, a farmer from Bowraville on the mid NSW
coast and Glenn Jones, a surveyor with the Central Mapping Authority from
Bathurst, was to prove highly capable as the two worked well together.
  There was certainly no shortage of money being thrown around to help make
Camel a household name. Estimates for the event were in the region of $5
million when advertising commitments were included. For that price the
organisers obviously felt they owned the competitors.
  Jet lagged and faced with a total change of climatic conditions from a
European winter, contestants gathered in Cairns the day before the event
started. Each team was introduced to its short wheelbase diesel engined
Land Rover 90 and told to check inventories of tools and other items such
as tow straps, snatch blocks and D shackles. Packing was surprisingly easy
until it came time to fit in the optional journalist somewhere in the back
amidst the fresh fruit, muesli bars and tool box.
  Other journalists would be following the event in long wheelbase Land
Rover 110s. For many of them it was an experience of realising that sometimes
a box of food has more importance than yet another set of camera lenses
when space is at a premium.
  The convoy left Cairns complete with police escort. Far from being a dawn
start, we headed down the Esplanade at 1.30 pm on route for Cooktown and
the first night stop.
  What should have been a five hour drive expanded to seven from continual
halts at the request of the film crew. The photographers seemed to think
their lives depended on shooting all their film in the first 24 hours.
  Our route lay up the coast road on the Captain Cook Highway to Port Douglas,
crossing over the Daintree River north of Mossman and across the Bloomfield
River on the Peninsula Development Road.
  While the Europeans were still getting used to driving on dirt roads, the
Australians were wondering if conditions were actually going to approach
four wheel drive territory.
  The total convoy of 24 vehicles and 73 people headed slowly towards
Fairlight. Such a lack of urgency did not suit the German film crew hired
to produce a promotional film of the event. They wanted shots of vehicles
diving into rivers and drifting around corners. Obviously the organisers
wanted high drama photography.
  As those who travel off-road are all aware, increase speed and you increase
the chances of damage. Night fell and with it the Land Rover of a film crew
from Luxembourg headed for notoriety and a large hole at the edge of the
track.
  Recovering a vehicle takes time and it was close on midnight before we
made camp. A morning wash in the Palmer River and we were off once again towards
Maytown, now simply the deserted remains of what was once a thriving gold
centre.
  Although the first two days of the trip were over, we had not encountered
anything that remotely resembled an adventure. Not surprisingly, the crews
were getting restless at being used as unpaid stooges in the preparation
of a promotional film rather than taking part in "man's greatest adventure
against the environment."
  As each day progressed it became obvious that serious and intense political
struggles were being enacted inside the Reynolds organisation. As the power
plays started to have an effect on the event organisation it seemed that
the corporate problems of Geneva and North Carolina were to be aired in the
bush of far north Queensland.
  The men from Land Rover then appeared on the scene, however, and introduced
the start of the special stages for the teams. The first stage comprised
two separate river crossings through water about 1.5m deep and was followed
by a 30 minute stage of traversing through the river in a section with a
depth of 1.7m.
  Marks were awarded on the basis of correct reconnaissance of obstacles
and how to deal effectively with them. The ability of a team to work together
was also important as was completing the task smoothly and cleanly.
  In this first stage the Australian team showed just how well it could
handle a problem slowly and carefully without drama. An excellent performance
resulted in the Australians being placed second, only three points behind
the American team of Frank Smith and Carl Guffey.
  Failure to work out a route through the water in advance resulted in the
Belgians sinking in a deeper part of the river and the start of a three
hour recovery program. Unaffected by the experience of falling on their
side, the Luxembourg film crew showed that ignorance heralds bravery as
they headed into deep water to get a close-up shot of the Belgian team in
trouble. Not surprisingly, they sank deeper and harder than the object of
their attention and proved just as difficult to return in one piece to the
river bank.
  Day Three started at 6 am with a timed hill climb. This served to prove
who could drive up a hill fastest rather than any display to skill or general
driving ability. Bearing in mind the need to safeguard vehicles and equipment
for a further 10 days, Australia and Germany adopted a more leisurely attitude
and paid the penalty of low scores.
  The political battle between Reynolds personnel once more reared its head
as Camel Trophy Manager Patrick Lexcellent changed routes from those scouted
by the guide Bob Flesser.
  With the arrogant air only the French have ever perfected as an art form,
Lexcellent instructed all crews that driving speeds were far too slow. Sounding
like Inspector Clouseau he issued the statement that cut across all safety
aspects by saying "You must drive fastair. If you cannot keep erp with ze
car in frernt, give the wheel to somewern ooh can!"
  At this stage the event appeared to be run purely as a promotional vehicle
for Camel cigarettes and to make a sales oriented film using unpaid actors
from 14 countries. The guys that had travelled half way round the world in the
belief they were entering a true adventure were beginning to feel somewhat used.
  But special stage number three set by Australian judges Geoff Stubbs and John
Ayre with Graham Fazakarley of Land Rover Britain turned the Camel Trophy around
in terms of credibility and morale.
  Each team had to drive into the Palmer River, climb up the far bank, pass behind
a marker and then drive back to a point close to the start position. Here they had
to either drive onto the bank or winch themselves out.
  It was a sensible task requiring skill and forethought with the type of
conditions expected by any keen four wheel drive enthusiast. Australia was top
scorer with a maximum of 81 points but the scoring system was fast becoming
farcical, as points awarded for the simple hill climb had peaked at 100 for first
place. It was incongruous that a 30 minute event requiring considerable ability
scored less than a 20 second dash up a hill, but the judges were ordered to handle
it that way by the organisers.
  Special stage number four took place out of water, but still in a creek bed, at
Terrible Creek between Palmerville and King Junction. For this section the track
wound through the soft river sand for a total of 200 metres before heading up a
steep washaway.
  France was top scorer, followed by Australia, as teams had to use sand ladders
across a badly eroded section of the climb from the river bed. The United Kingdon
fared rather badly and lost time digging equipment from the soft river bed.
  That night, the crossing of the Palmer River and one of its tributaries started
teams working together as a group rather than as individuals. Steep river entries
and exits meant winching out with the 90s strapped together on the far bank to
provide the necessary muscle.
  The 110s carrying not only the journalists' extra gear but also the inflatable
rafts and outboard motors caught most of the mud and were the main obstacle in
heaving equipment out of the water.
  There was no doubt in the minds of the competitors that here was the stuff the
trip had promised. Plenty of mud and heaps of challenges as Land Rovers submerged
and reappeared at the end of a snatch strap heading for a steep exit from the
river.
  Sunday and day four of the event should have seen us at King Junction for
refuelling and the chance to catch up on daily maintenance of the support
vehicles, but because of the constant change of route plans, guide Bob Flesser was
effectively way off his proposed route and the entire convoy played around in the
bush wasting time and getting totally lost. Eventually we arrived at King Junction
and the entire break was spent under the Land Rover with a spot of spanner
twirling to tighten various bits and pieces.
  It says something for Land Rover that none of the competing vehicles had broken
down. It also gave an insight into the lack of event planning which allowed
vehicles to participate without following even the basic recommendations of the
manufacturer as far as a shake down of mechanical condition was concerned.
  Prior to the start of the Camel Trophy, mechanics had not been given time to run
in and properly check over the vehicles. As an example, my own Land Rover had
completed just 480 km without the benefit of even a first service.
  Maintenance session over, we crossed the Palmer River once more before camping
for the night. Day five, and another 6 am start saw us heading for the Mitchell
River.
  On the banks of the Mitchell we were faced with the problem of wide free flowing
water with quicksand in the centre to catch the unwary vehicle.

