TRIATHLON NEWS  

 The world's leading triathletes will converge on Fremantle (WA) in January
to take part in the inaugural  World Sprint Triathlon Championships.
 Billed as one of the major events during the America's Cup Festival of
Sport, the championships will further test the strength of the two major
sporting foes, Australia and the United States.
 Instead of boat-on-boat battles, spectators at the January 18 event will
be able to watch more than 1000 triathletes tackle a 1.5km swim, a 40km
bicycle charge and a 10km run. Euphemistically called the `sprint' distance,
it will take the sport's top performers at least two hours to complete,
and represents a tough test of endurance.
 Current world champion Scott Tinley has been contracted to compete, as
has Scott Molina, the world's number one in the sprint event. Four-times 
Hawaii Ironman winner Dave Scott will also show the crowd why he has become a 
legend in the sport, and Mark Allen, who has been ranked number two for both the
sprint and the long-distance event, will be putting up some very stiff
competition. Added to the rivalry between Australia and the US will be
top-class competition from countries like Japan, New Zealand, Malaysia
and the UK.
 Australia's Gayelene Clews, wife of Robert de Castella, is one of the
favourites for the women's event, having already proved herself the fastest
woman over the sprint distance. However, Gayelene will be up against tough
competition from the likes of long-distance world record holder Erin Baker
of New Zealand.
 The stars will be competing for the world's richest triathlon prizemoney
- a total purse of $200,000. So it's hardly surprising that around 40% of
the triathletes taking part in the big event will come from overseas and
interstate.
 According to Tom Locke, race director for the event, sprint triathlon
is a relatively new sporting phenomenon in Australia, but one which is taking
off with astounding speed.
 `Although sprint triathlon gained its popularity initially in the USA,
it now has a truly international appeal,' he said. 'In 1980 there were only
50 triathlon events held in Australia, attracting 5000 competitors. But
last year 2100 events, mostly over the sprint distance, were held - with
the field totalling a staggering 1.1 million competitors.'
 Mr Locke said the recent Coral Coast Triathlon in Queensland had produced
28 qualifiers, with times from the first five placegetters (all Australians)
that ranked them among the best (Andrew Steele 1:52.55, Stephen Foster 1:53.01,
Mark Doyle 1:55.22, Simon Skillicorn 1:58.24 and Mike Irwin 1:59.12).
 With support from several Australian corporations and also the sporting
bodies concerned, the World Sprint Triathlon Championships seem set to firmly
establish Australia on the elite triathlon circuit.

