<subsample>
	<id> E22a </id>
	


	<source> Australian Gourmet - January 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Chianti rediscovered </h>
	

Heretofore much maligned by serious red drinkers, chianti has broken free
of its straw-covered prison and moved into the realm of the world's finest
wines.
  Here, Sandra Symons is converted to the cause by one of its most fervent
and charming champions.
  It is rather ironical that chianti has gradually been saddled with a
pizza-parlour image when it is the very wine that initially made the most
positive headway for Italian wines in the international marketplace.
  But chianti has been described as the phoenix of wines - and Italy's leading
winemakers are currently making a huge effort to see that this particular
great wine is re-born with an even greater reputation. Leading the drive
to upgrade chianti's image is the world-renowned Tuscany-based company,
I.L. Ruffino. The company is now wholly owned by the Folonari family, which
first took control of Ruffino in 1913 after the founding cousins, Ilario
and Leopoldo Ruffino, got into financial difficulty.
  One of the six Folonari brothers, Dr Italo Folonari, recently made his
move on Australia, visiting distributors, quizzing consumers and conducting
seminars in an effort to determine local attitudes to this much-maligned
wine. An executive director of the company, Dr Folonari is responsible for
all export markets and for increasing wine sales overseas. What he discovered
during his visits to Perth, Melbourne and Sydney was that Australians equate
chianti with a straw-covered bottle and regard all chiantis as tasting exactly
the same. Dr Folonari intends to correct that misapprehension.
  Italo Folonari is the embodiment of what you would expect of a man who
travels the world extolling the virtues of Tuscan wines. He is charming,
handsome, eloquent. He greeted this gourmet writer in his Melbourne hotel
room with an urbane kiss on the hand, laughingly flicking his eyes up to
gauge the effect of the gesture. The pleasure generated was somewhat diffused
by the drink offered, Coca-Cola, the original, naturally.
  Charming gestures dispensed with, Dr Folonari gets right down to business
by explaining that no wine has had a grander tradition than chianti. Did
we know that Michelangelo owned chianti vineyards and gave the wine to Pope
Pius II? And in more recent times, Thomas Jefferson introduced it to the
White House and, presumably, to America, Australians have not been so
lucky.
  &quot;The wines coming here,&quot; he said, with a barely disguised look of
displeasure, &quot;were those being made for Italian consumption, and the average
Italian wine drinker is not too discerning.&quot; Was there, perhaps, just a
hint of a suggestion that the Australian approach to Italian wine, chianti
in particular, hasn't been one of discernment either? Dr Folonari doesn't necessarily 
lay the blame here. &quot;No, the mistake lies in another place,&quot; he declared
dramatically. It transpired that he actually meant two places - Italy, for
exporting cheap wines, and France, for doing the same.
  But attention for this misdemeanour is focused, he commented, on Italy
because &quot;it is the last arrived&quot;. And it follows that good Italian wines
have, in consequence, suffered. &quot;The problem is not new to us. Until ten
years ago, the newcomers to the industry had not the technology, so the
wine coming from them had perhaps too much tannin and acidity and was maybe
cloudy. We decided then to start an operation by which some of the most
sophisticated markets around the world could be educated to drink our wines
in bottles not covered in straw,&quot; he said.
  This move by Ruffino has caused an enormous hiccup among those who like
to drink their chianti and have a candle-holder too. But the company is
determined to put chianti back in its rightful place as Ruffino sees it
- among the acknowledged great wines. &quot;It is not a question of making our
chianti better - we already make the best,&quot; Dr Folonari said. &quot;In 1956,
I approached a top New York restaurant and suggested they try our Chianti
Classico Riserva Ducale. It is not presented in the straw fiasco but in
an elegant bottle. They took ten cases and within two years had bought 1000
cases.&quot;
  The idea was to show winelovers that traditionally made Chianti
Classico was a fruity, soft, velvety wine, quite unlike the &quot;harsh&quot; reputation
gained by several chiantis on the market. So successful has this quality,
expensive, up-market wine become, that Ruffino had had to put the gold label
Riserva Ducale on quota.
  One of the secrets of the success of Riserva Ducale is the Ruffino insistence
on using the maximum permitted proportion of the Sangiovese grapes in the
make-up of the blend. This is the grape variety that produces the classical,
traditional, soft chiantis. And Ruffino also respects the use of the governo
all'uso toscano, the addition of a quantity of must, which creates softness
in the wine.
  In 1974, Ruffino launched an advertising and promotion campaign, presenting
chianti in a new, special Florentine bottle, based on the assumption that
people were more interested in the wine than in the old, straw-covered bottle.
It was such a shock tactic that even Time magazine reacted by running a
story on the Ruffino campaign. &quot;In the first year, our sales dropped five
percent but by 1978, our overall sales had trebled. Now in England, our
chianti sales are 75 percent in the new bottle, 25 percent in the straw,&quot;
Dr Folonari said.
  The making of Tuscan wines is one of the oldest and most fascinating
traditions in the world. One cannot imagine chianti without Tuscany - and
it is equally difficult to imagine Tuscany without chianti. The chianti
grapes thrive on the steep hillside slopes lying, variously, between 200
and 700 metres above sea level. This area which has nurtured some of the
world's greatest artists, also produced some of the world's earliest wines.
  The Etruscans grew grapes and produced wine as part of religious ceremonies
in the 9th century BC. The Romans, who conquered the land, also knew about
winemaking. The Lega Del Chianti was established in 1270 to defend the people
and the land, and it also created the first wine quality law.
  In the 14th century, the local wine acquired the name chianti. Some
historians say the name comes from  the Latin clangor, meaning the
high-pitched squeal of a trumpet or cry of a bird. At that time, the country
was wild and covered with forests, and some place-names in Chianti, such
as Avane and Avenano, have strong connections with the art of hunting.
In the 19th century, the Baron Bettino Riscasoli developed the new combination
of grapes that is still used today.
  Chianti, recognized as a wine having every right to the protection of
a controlled denomination of origin (DOC), has been subject to standards
regulating its production since 1967, when a law was passed introducing
these standards to be applied in five provinces of Tuscany - Florence,
Siena, Arezzo, Pisa and Pistoia. The law dictates that the wine must be
made with grapes from certain types of vines: Sangiovese (which gives the
wine body and perfume), black Caniaolo (which helps to soften the wine),
Trebbiano Toscano and Malvasia del Chianti (which lighten the wine and
increase the flavour). The grapes are mixed in the following proportions:
50-80 percent, Sangiovese; 10-30 percent, black Canaiolo; 10-30 percent,
Trebbiano Toscano and Malvasia del Chianti, with five percent maximum other
complementary grapes.
  Supplementary vines recommended for addition to the basic brew include
Colorino, which has proved to be particularly suitable for governing chianti.
This traditional winemaking technique, the governo all'uso chianti, consists
of a slow period of fermentation of the newly drawn wine, brought about
by the addition of from five to 10 percent of specially selected grapes
picked before the harvest from a limited number of vines registered in the
Chianti Roll.
  The best bunches, known as &quot;the chosen few&quot;, are selected and set aside
to dry out a little on specially constructed racks. This &quot;governing&quot; technique
gives the wine a more rounded flavour, a higher glycerine content, greater
freshness and more vivacity than would otherwise be the case. Chianti wine,
to warrant that name, must never be put on the market before it reaches
an alcoholic content of 11.5%, while for Chianti Classico the minimum is 12%.
    The greatest quantities of chianti are grown in the hills around Florence
and Siena and in the region of the &quot;Chianti Classico&quot;. About 39,000 winemakers,
from small private growers to large industrial companies, are involved
in the production of chianti. This multiplicity, still partly in the hands
of the families that have been vine-tenders for generations, is proof enough
of the artisan nature of wine-growing in Chianti. Less than a quarter of
the entire regional production of Tuscany has the right to call itself
chianti and to have the DOC denomination. And not all wine produced within
the Chianti region necessarily carries that name since, if a season has
been poor and local harvests of indifferent quality, a portion will be
downgraded and used in the Tuscan vin ordinaire.
  In the 1920s, Chianti Classico winemakers banded together to bring quality
to their abused name. In recent years, Ruffino has widened its production
sources in the heart of the Chianti Classico area. The company has four
wine farms in the region around Panzano, including the Tenuta Casa di Sala
and the prestigious villa and estate, Fattoria di Zano, high on the hill
overlooking the town of Greve. Another wine farm a little farther north
of Greve, Fattoria di Passo dei Pecorai (where the shepherds used to meet)
has recently been totally modernized with vast installations of
temperature-controlled stainless-steel vats and fermentation tanks. Farther
north on the edge of the Chianti Classico between Grassina and San Polo
is Fattoria di Montemasso where Ruffino has invested in new plant and cellar
equipment for the production of traditional chianti wines.
  Dr Folonari explained that, while Ruffino has been dedicated to maintaining
the fine old traditions of chianti-making, the company has had to be cognizant
of changing attitudes. Chianti wines have always been the most popular of
all wines in Italy but with the Italian lifestyle changing and the traditional
patriarchal lunch at home as the main event of the day becoming a thing
of the past, consumption of wine has declined, particularly the red wines.
The trend has been to lighter wines as everyday consumption wines and there
has been a perceptible increase in higher quality wines as the general
standard of living has risen. In meeting new demands, Ruffino has, says
Dr Folonari, recently launched a special &quot;wine of the spring&quot; called Torgaio
di San Salvatore. &quot;It is young chianti made mostly from Sangiovese grapes
with a proportion of Trebbiano.&quot; Once the second fermentation has finished,
the wine is immediately put into bottles for distribution as a light cool
red for summer drinking.
  Another recent Ruffino introduction has been the single estate Aziano
Chianti Classico. The Zano estate is one of the oldest in Chianti and was
mentioned in a sale document dated 1009. The area was dominated by a round
tower used to keep watch for raiders; the tower is reproduced on the Aziano
label.
  And thus is the way paved for the revival of a classic. Italo Folonari
gave me a bottle of Ruffino Chianti Classico. It was a perfect toast to
a future &quot;when everything old is new again&quot;. Only this time it won't be
a fiasco.


</subsample>
