Eggs Nature's own pre-packed, healthy convenience food - but bad shop storage
means many are stale  

Consider a moment the credentials of an egg. A staple food for almost  5000
years, each one is packed with protein, fats, water and essential vitamins
and minerals.
Eggs are versatile ... fried, poached, boiled or scrambled, they cater to
a wide range of taste preferences.
And they're useful.  Cakes, custards and mayonnaise (to name a few) wouldn't
be the same without egg's thickening and binding action.
Eggs are convenient - they can be cooked and served in less than five minutes
- and they come in remarkably strong, compact packaging (even if they aren't
square yet!).
Over the centuries eggs have been recognised as more than just a food source.
They've been collected, preserved, ornately decorated, given as gifts and
treasured.
They are a symbol of fertility and, in the Christian tradition, of new life.
How much must you pay for something that can do and be so many things? If
it's the gold and jewel encrusted Faberge style egg you're after, you could
pay as much as US$1 760 000 at auction.
The humble hen's egg, served up with toast for breakfast, can be yours for
only 15 cents.
Few of us are in the Faberge egg price range but most of us regularly buy
hens' eggs. Australians eat an average of four eggs each week, slightly more
in winter and fewer in the heat of summer.
That adds up to hundreds of millions of dozens of eggs being produced and
sold each year.

 Quality control  
Eggs sold to consumers are first quality eggs. To qualify as first quality,
they must have shells which are clean, uncracked, free from stain, not thin,
porous, rough or misshapen.
To check these features eggs are examined over a strong light, a process
called candling (see picture at right). Once turned skilfully by hand, they
are now passed over the light by conveyor belt. Those with shell faults
or visible blood spots are removed; the rest are graded by weight and packed
for sale. A clean egg is important for more than just aesthetic reasons.
The shell is porous and bacteria from soiling (either dirt or faeces) can
penetrate it. If it becomes wet through condensation or poor washing, the
rate and risk of bacterial penetration is increased.
As well as being checked externally, some eggs from each batch are opened
and tested for freshness. Routine microbiological tests are also done
including tests for salmonella, bacteria which cause food poisoning.

 What's in an egg?  
Egg yolks are held in shape by a fine membrane called the vitelline membrane
(see diagram). On each yolk is a circular white spot called the germinal
disc. This is where the chicken would begin to develop were the egg to be
fertilised.
Surrounding the yolk are two types of the protein albumen (commonly called
white); a thick layer and an outer more liquid layer. In the thick layer
are two rope-like cords called chalazae which anchor the yolk in the centre
of the egg.
Both the white and yolk are surrounded by membranes which enclose the egg
in a fibrous sac. The outer membrane is attached to the shell.
About 75% of an egg is water (the white is almost 90% water); protein accounts
for another 12%. A further 11% is fats - saturated, mono-unsaturated and
polyunsaturated - which are found in the yolk.
Eggs contain several vitamins and minerals including vitamins A,B,D and
E and iron, zinc, iodine, phosphorus and potassium. In all, an egg contains
roughly 335 kilojoules, about the same as a medium banana.
That makes them a good food source and quite suitable for dieters. However, the
250 of mg cholesterol they contain is a relatively high level. (By comparison,
a serve of roast chicken, without skin, contains only 130 mg). Cholesterol,
a substance found mainly in animal cells, is produced naturally by the
body and is needed to make bile acids and hormones.
When we absorb cholesterol in the food we eat, the body should compensate
by making less of its own. However, some people's bodies don't compensate
and this leads to excessive cholesterol in the blood. This excess cholesterol
plays a role in the accumulation of fatty material in the walls of the
arteries. A high level is therefore a risk factor for heart attacks.
The National Heart Foundation recommends that people with high cholesterol
levels should limit their egg yolk intake to two a week. This recommendation
is part of the guidelines to reduce the total amount of fat eaten, particularly
saturated fat and dietary cholesterol.
Eggs are an excellent source of other nutrients and it would be
counterproductive to cut them out completely while still taking in fats
from other food sources such as chocolate.

 Consumer trends  
We consumers can be a funny bunch. Creatures of habit, we are often loyally
committed to particular brands or sizes and can feel quite put out should
these be unavailable.
Such is the case with eggs which many consumers buy in the same size every
week. Problems arise w0hen these are in short supply during certain times
of the year.
To prevent this the NSW Egg Corporation has recently decreased its number
of egg sizes to three, the only marketing authority to do so. Despite
fluctuations in size availability it is confident of being able to provide
consumers with eggs of the same size all year round.
Another of our egg preferences is a yolk of a deep golden colour. Yolk colour
is determined by the amount of carotenoids - intensely coloured, naturally
occurring pigments - in the hen's diet.
Carotenoids are found in feeds such as maize, clover and grass. To produce
bright yolks, producers include these in the hen's diets or add synthetic
carotenoids to their feed.
Recognising consumer support for the brighter yolks, the egg marketing
authorities have encouraged producers to add carotenoids to their hens'
feed. The boards measure colour on a Roche scale (named after a company
which makes the carotenoids); and all our egg samples scored 10 (a rich
orange colour) except for ACT free range eggs which had paler yolks ranging
between four and nine.
Tests on synthetic carotenoids to date have shown them to be harmless but
that is no reason to support the use of additives.
Our preference for bright yolks is probably linked to a belief that they
are healthier. In fact there is no nutritional difference between pale
and bright yolked eggs and the addition of synthetic carotenoids, though
profitable for the company manufacturing them, is unnecessary.
Neither is there any nutritional difference between brown or white shelled
eggs yet in many areas there is a growing preference for brown shells. The
only difference between the two is that brown shells may be slightly stronger
than white shells.
There aren't many other advantages to brown shells; the hens that lay them
eat more and produce fewer eggs than their white shell-laying counterparts
and brown shells are not as pervious to light which makes it harder to pick
up cracks and blood spots during candling.
Perhaps there is an association in some people's minds with that other staple,
bread, which is more nutritious in its brown version.

 Egg fact - no yolk  
Like urban myths of crocodiles in the sewer system, egg myths abound.
Unfortunately, they are just that, myths. Here are some of the more popular
ones.
‚2 You will use more kilojoules digesting a hard-boiled egg than it contains.
This has also been said of lettuce, and, oh that it were true. Sadly for
dieters, in both cases it isn't.
‚2 A blood spot means an egg has been fertilised.
There is little possibility of eggs intended for market being fertilised.
Even if it were to happen, a fertilised egg would be picked up and removed
during candling. Blood spots occur when a blood vessel on the yolk ruptures
as the egg is released from the ovarian follicle. Blood spots won't hurt
you but if you don't like them simply remove them.
‚2 Free range eggs are better for you than eggs from caged hens.
Eggs from free range hens have been found to contain marginally more of two
nutrients, folic acid and vitamin B12. Within the framework of a healthy
diet the nutritional differences are insignificant.
‚2 Eggs don't need to be refrigerated they won't go off.
True; they won't go stale overnight but their quality deteriorates much
more quickly when they aren't refrigerated. Eventually they do go bad. See
Storage and handling for more details.
‚2 Eggs can't be frozen.
Eggs shouldn't be frozen in their shell but beaten eggs will freeze as will
egg whites. To freeze yolks, sugar or salt must be added.

 From farm to table  
The sale of eggs in most of Australia is regulated by statutory marketing
authorities. These authorities control the production of eggs and in many
cases also arrange their packing and distribution.
In Victoria about 40% of eggs are graded and sold by the Egg Marketing Board
or other grading companies under the brand name Egg Farmers of Victoria.
A further 20% are packed by producers but marketed via the board. The
remaining 40% are handled by producers licensed to sell directly to
retailers. The board also sells about 5000 dozen  `free range' eggs a week.
More than 75% of the eggs in SA are packed by producers and marketed by
the egg board under the brand name Country Farm. The rest, including free
range eggs, are sold direct to retailers by producers.
Most Tasmanian eggs, sold as Tasmanian Country Farm, are sold to retailers
by the producers but egg quality control and levy payments are administered
by a board. There are only a few free range producers in Tasmania and they
market their own eggs. However it is estimated that about 40% of the eggs
eaten in the State are from backyard hens so consumers still have reasonable
access to free range eggs.
Not so sonsumers in WA where there is only one free range producer. About
93% of eggs in WA are sold by the egg board under the brand name Golden
Egg Farms. The balance is sold at farm gates by approved producers.
  In Queensland, 75% of eggs are sold through the South Queensland Egg
Marketing Board under the brand name Sunny Queen Egg Farms. Others are handled
by the Central Queensland Egg Marketing Board and Fresha Products in North
Queensland.
Fresha Products also markets eggs in the NT where no marketing authority
exists. Nor is there one in the ACT; most eggs there are sold by the private
company, Parkwood Eggs.
More than one-third of the eggs in NSW are sold directly to retailers by
producers. Some of these are free range eggs.

 Free range versus battery?  
What should come first, the chicken or the egg? Supporters of free range
egg production say the chicken. Central to the free range debate is the
welfare of the hens.
Supporters of battery production opt for the egg. It is cheaper and more
efficient to produce eggs by the battery (or caged) method, and this should
be a producer's priority, they claim.
What is battery farming? Battery hens are kept in artificially lighted sheds
in wire cages with slightly sloped floors so that the eggs will roll into
trays. There are usually three or four hens to a cage and they are debeaked
to prevent them hurting one another.
The definition of free range hens varies but generally the term is used
to define hens which aren't caged. Some argue that hens aren't truly free
range unless there are only 10 to an acre; others consider 300 hens to an
acre still to be free range.
If you buy an egg marked free range you can probably expect that the hen
that laid it has been able to roam free throughout the day, has had access
to weatherproof shelter and has not been subject to artificial lighting.

