CONFIDENCE CRISIS FOR FBT SLEUTHS By Kenneth Randall The auditor-general's stinging criticism throws doubts on whether the new
tax can be administered effectively  

Introduction of the prescribed payments system in 1983 gave the Office
of Taxation its first big new project in almost a decade. It was a
straightforward system, devised and recommended by the tax department, which
then proceeded to make a hash of it, according to an efficiency audit by
the Auditor-General's Office.
  Compared with the fringe benefits tax, the prescribed payments system
is child's play. Hence the tax office's ability to cope with the fringe
benefits legislation has been called into question - publicy by the Opposition
and some quarters of business, and privately, but possibly with even greater
anxiety, from the Government side.
  Now, in addition to the report just published, the Auditor-General's Office
is believed to be examining the tax office's handling of profit shifting
and provisional taxpayers.
  As an example of the tax office's foul-ups on prescibed payments, its
investigation bureaucracy did not follow up tax assessor's advice that
a husband and wife in the building industry, identified as having failed
to lodge returns, were continuing to take a suspiciously secretive attitude
to the tax office. The auditor-general's team looked up the couple in the
telephone directory and made some simple checks which showed, among other
things, that they were trying to sell a new house for $430,000. They were
also directors and sole shareholders of a private company that had lodged
returns disclosing a gross income of $1.2 million and nil taxable income
over five years. The tax office did, after all, decide to investigate further.
But bankruptcy had intervened, making it unlikely that further tax would
be recovered.
  The Labor Government has a great deal of its political future riding on
a smooth start-up and some early fine tuning of the fringe benefits tax.
Things have been changing fast at the tax office since the end of the
auditor-general's foray. How fast, will become clearer when the House of
Representatives standing committee on expenditure begins hearings on the
efficiency audit report, probably in February or March.
  In the meantime, the report leaves the Government with a sizeable
presentational problem. 

