Keep the kids in the country By Barbara Preston  

  The controversy over the fringe benefits tax has flushed out another form
of public funding of private schools.
  This time it's the full accommodation for boarding school housemasters
and housemistresses which has in the past been tax free.
  That means that the boarding schools often get away with paying the live-in
supervisory staff low wages, then providing free board worth from about
$10,000 for basic accommodation and meals.
  That is an annual subsidy by the public of about $14,000, $10,000 or $5,000
per staff member, depending on their marginal tax rate and the value of
their board. Principals and other senior staff with quality accommodation
and high salaries would of course be subsidised by well over $14,000 a
year. That means boarding fees are much lower than they would otherwise be
- they are subsidised by the public through taxation expenditure.
  The most wealthy private schools appear to be lobbying strongly for this
particular form of state aid to continue, and the media have treated their
plight sympathetically. The National Times on Sunday, under the heading,
"The pain, pities and potty pettiness of the new `perks' tax", quoted the
bursar at Shore (one of Sydney's `Great Public School' private schools)
estimating that FBT will cost the school between $60,000 and $70,000 on
house masters' accommodation alone (plus more for fee discounts for the
children of staff, free meals, etc.).
  Xavier College in Melbourne has also taken its complaints to the press.
The Sun (28/10/86) quoted Xavier's finance manager estimating a cost of
$25,000 a year for accommodation for supervisory staff.
  The National Council of Independent Schools, according to The Sun, said
the `parents who sent their children to boarding schools would be innocent
victims of the federal government's fringe benefits tax'.
  Perhaps it's really the rest of the community who have been innocent victims
- not realising that their taxes have been subsidising the fees of those
who send their offspring to board at schools like Shore and Xavier as well
as providing the better known forms of state aid.
  It's a price for private boarding schools that we should thank the federal
government the community no longer has to pay. Rural communities already
pay far too heavy a price for the deserting of their local schools by the
children of the wealthy. 
  When the farmers and graziers, professionals and business people in the
country send their children away to boarding schools their actions have an
impact on both the local economy and on the education of those who continue
to attend local schools.
  If more children attend local country schools then more teachers, cleaners,
clerical and ancillary staff could be employed. There would be more money
locally for buildings and maintenance. The money spent on wages and capital
works would be largely ploughed back into the local economy. Schools pay
a vital part in rural economies, especially providing stability in times
of rural recession.
  Fewer children staying in the area to attend secondary schooling often
means a lack of sufficient numbers for viable schools in the smaller towns.
As it is often those with the highest academic aspirations who are sent
away to boarding school the local school does not have a representative
mix of students, but has the more academic creamed off, and may have
difficulty maintaining a viable years 11 and 12 program.
  Educationally it's a bit of a vicious circle - the graziers et al send
their children away, then the local schools are thought not to provide a
full quality education, then others feel pressure to send their children
away, compounding the problem when they succumb. The contrast between different
areas, otherwise similar, but with different traditions of sending children
away or having them attend local schools can be striking. In the latter
there is usually a vitality and strength of local schooling, playing a major
role in local economic and cultural life, and in the social integration
of the community.
  By sending their children away from the local area the higher income
rural families are depriving the communities, on which they themselves
depend, of economic, cultural and educational input and stability.
  Perhaps it's time for a `keep the kids in the country' campaign ...

