Getting information about the Third World  

The Ideas Centre-Resource Centre for International Cooperation is the largest
centre of its kind in Australia. It has easy access, well catalogued
information on development and all Third World countries. It looks behind
the media image of the Third World - countries where one disaster seems
to happen after another - to give a background to current political, social
and economic events in those countries. It examines the causes of poverty
and not just the symptoms.
  The centre consists of a large reference library, which is open to the
public 9-5 Monday to Friday, with a special extension on Wednesday to 7
pm. Many hundreds of secondary and tertiary students, teachers, and lecturers
and others use the centre each year. School groups can make a booking to
come in and work on assignments and hear talks. The Centre also does a lot
by mail, for people who cannot use the library in person. It has three mail
services: the Ideas Bulletin, a sales centre and an ad hoc information service.
  The bulletin comes out ten times per year. It produces the catalogue of
journal articles held at the Centre. The Ideas Centre has a large journal
collection - about 200 periodicals from all around the world. This means
the information is constantly being updated. The best articles are catalogued
under topic and country headings, in the form of ten line summaries. These
make up each issue of the bulletin and subscribers can order copies of the
whole article if they have an area of special interest. There is a photocopying
request form at the back of each issue; the charge is 12c per page plus 
postage. Teachers find this a very useful service.
  The sales centre provides at reasonable cost a whole variety of fact sheets,
country overviews, occasional papers and other publications which are not
readily available in other bookshops. Some of these are produced by aid
agencies in Australia; others are brought in from overseas. All of them
provide current and reliable information in a non-academic style. Teachers
can order publications from the sales list by mail or phone, and the school
can pay on an invoice.
  The information service is particularly useful for teachers, whose needs
may not be met entirely by the sales centre publications. They can ring
or write for information on any development topic or Third World country.
Ideas Centre staff photocopy articles from the library files and post it
out for 12c page plus postage. As they keep the cataloguing up to date they 
know of the best recent articles on each subject.
  Teachers and students of geography, history, economics, social studies,
Asian studies, home science, agriculture and general studies all find useful
resource material at the ideas centre. We hope you will find us useful as
well!

 