<subsample>
	<id> E33c </id>
	


	<source> Australian Teacher - November 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Wage increases will not be handed to us on a platter </h>
	


	<bl> By Graham Marshall </bl>
	

  Bill Kelty argued in the weeks leading up to the ACTU Special Unions
Conference that the union movement had three options on wages.
  One, go for full wage indexation in the next national wage case in the
knowledge that a discounted two per cent increase would be the inevitable
result and that the centralised wage fixation system would then collapse.
  Two, go outside the centralised wage fixation system and try to get increases
in the market.
  Or three, go for a new system which would give protection to low income
earners through the centralised system but allow greater flexibility for
unions to get further increases above the fixed general increase.
  This third option, or the two-tier option as it has come to be known,
was certainly Bill Kelty's preference and it was clearly accepted by the
ACTU Special Unions Conference as the best means of maximising the wage
outcomes in the present economic and political environment.
  It was not an option which was supported by the ATF and a number of other
public sector unions. For us there was too much uncertainty about the second
tier.
  It is clear that the second tier is designed primarily as a safety valve
mechanism to allow the industrially strong unions in the private sector
to get additional wage increases to those handed down in national wage
cases.
  But now that the ACTU has made its decision, we will have to look at various
ways teachers might be able to get wage increases in the second tier.
  We must remember here that the ACTU decision simply determines what it
will propose to the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission
at the next national wage case. What the Commission actually decides might
be quite another matter.
  For this reason the ATF Executive decided prior to the Special Unions
Conference ... `that if the majority of unions agree to the two tier proposal
as the most viable option which retains some measure of centralised wage
fixation, then the ATF reserves its final position on the two tier proposal
until such time as the Commission brings down its decision with the details
of the increases to be awarded, the timing of such increases and the
principles that would be attached to the operations of the second tier'.
  If teachers are to have any chance of getting second tier wage increases,
these increases must be made possible by the principles adopted by the
Commission.  The decision of the Special Unions Conference means that the
ACTU will argue for an expansion of the current principles covering additional
wage increases (additional to those increases which everyone gets) so that
many more unions will have an opportunity to get these increases on an industry
by industry or award by award basis.
  If the Commission decides to adopt expanded principles which will make
it possible for teacher unions to mount cases for salary increases on the
basis of increased work value, wage comparability and/or restructure and
reclassification, then clearly the ATF will be more inclined to support
the new wage fixation system.
  Because the Special Unions Conference decided to hold a further ACTU
Special Unions Conference after the national wage decision case is handed
down, the ATF and all other ACTU affiliated unions will have another
opportunity to collectively decide whether we want to stick with the two
tier system or not.
  But whatever further decisions lie down the track, it is clear that teacher
unions around Australia are going to have to start gearing up for industrial
campaigns on salaries and salary related issues if we want to maintain
teachers' living standards.
  The best possible decisions of the Commission will simply provide us with
an opportunity to get wage increases. They won't actually give us these
wage increases.
  To achieve this we will need to succeed with particular claims for second
tier wage increases. And we can be certain that these wage increases will
not simply be handed to us on a platter.
  Whether we decide to campaign on reclassification (which is becoming a
significant issue around the country with increasing numbers of teachers
stuck at the top of the automatic salary scales) or some other issue, it
will require a concerted and nationally coordinated industrial campaign
to have the best chance of success.


</subsample>
