Design at NSWIT Neville Quarry A selection of work from students at the School of Architecture NSWIT  

The NSWIT Bachelor of Architecture course involves the completion of six
years school attendance part-time, and the equivalent of four years
architectural practice experience, as the requirement for the degree.
  The combination of an academic input and a confrontation with the realities
of design and documentation in practice provide a foundation for instilling
creative and technical skills.
  In each year the subject of Design is concentrated upon a four hour studio
experience.
  Years 1 and 2 stress design as a language for the communication of ideas
about materials and places. The design of complete buildings tends to be
avoided until an elementary design vocabulary has been established.
  Years 3 and 4 involve the development of design from a given brief. Over
the last two years these Design Studios have been decentralised into several
studios. Each studio consists of 10 to 12 students and is independently
organised by a single tutor who is responsible for the teaching process
and for the achievement and assessment of each student throughout the year.
Some of these studios lean strongly toward student participation while others
are more tutor-directed. As a result of this studio independence a wide
variety of approaches have emerged.
  The academic staff as a whole determine the general educational objectives
for each of the Design years, with the strategy for the pursuit of these
aims being delegated to individual tutors. Staff-student ratios range from
about 1:10 to 1:12, with many of the tutors being part-time.
  In years 5 and 6 the design projects involve large and/or complex buildings
as well as urban design issues. Students are expected to present a personal
design philosophy at this stage in their career.
  With the intention of complementing the studio work in Years 1 to 5,
architectural history is taught largely by the vigorous critical analysis
of seminal models of all periods thereby establishing a strong theoretical
basis for assessment of all design work.

