Thistle control by grazing management By Steve Davidson  

Spear thistle seems to flourish particularly well in grazed pastures where
soil fertility is high. To find out why, scientists compared its population
dynamics in grazed and ungrazed pastures - and they have come up with some
strategies for control.
Introduced from Europe more than a century ago, spear thistle (Cirsium vulgare)
is now widespread in Australia. Despite its attractive purple-flowering
heads, the species has won few admirers, being declared a noxious weed in
New South Wales, Tasmania, Victoria, and Western Australia. A prickly customer
also known as bull or black thistle, it is particularly common in pastures
of high-rainfall areas. 
  Spear thistle is usually biennial; it flowers in its second year then
dies. The seeds, shed in late summer or autumn, typically germinate after
the first substantial drop of rain and by spring the plants take the form
of small rosettes. In late spring of their second year the rosettes undergo
a radical change - they `bolt', sending up tall stems that, by mid summer,
bear 10-200 globular flowering heads.
  In pastures, dense stands of spear thistle can prove impenetrable to
livestock and man alike. Even after their full 2-year term, the dead spiny
plants often remain standing for a further 1-2 years - obstructing stock
and lowering wool quality.
  A New Zealand researcher recently reported that in the first year (of
a 2-year study) every extra thistle per square metre of pasture reduced
the liveweight gain of young sheep by 1.68 kg between November and March.
However, in the next year - when the sheep were 1 year older, thistles less
abundant, and more feed was available - he found no significant correlation.
  Application of a herbicide to control thistles - one that also reduced
the clover content of the pasture - was counterproductive. In the first
year, it actually reduced sheep liveweight gains to the same extent as a
thistle density of 1.67 per sq. metre because the clover content of the
pasture was temporarily reduced. A more specific herbicide did control
the weed without depressing liveweight gains, but chemical treatment is
both costly and time-consuming.
  The expense of herbicide treatment and the fact that spear thistle
infestations are mostly a nuisance in pasture land has prompted interest
in controlling them by grazing. The trouble is, thistles seem to be worse
in grazed pastures of high fertility than in ungrazed ones. They can even
be used as above-ground indicators of soil fertility. So what hope do we
have of stamping out the weed by grazing management?
  Dr Frank Forcella of the CSRIO Division of Plant Industry and Dr Helen Wood
of the Riverina-Murray Institute of Higher Education recently addressed
this question with a 3-year study into the effects of sheep on spear thistle
populations. They were particularly interested in how grazing affects the
various stages in the life cycle of the plant and its competitive ability
in the pasture community. Why do thistle prosper in grazed paddocks? The
scientists also investigated how the timing of herbicide applications
influences thistle numbers and assessed the use of grazing pressure, or
withholding of it, as a control measure.

 Demography: vital statistics  

For their field work, the researchers chose a heavily infested annual pasture
of red brome, annual ryegrass, sub clover, and fescues at the Ginninderra
Experiment Station, near Canberra. To examine the effects of grazing, in
1981 they divided the pasture into two plots: one was left ungrazed for
the next 3 years, the other was stocked with sheep whenever forage was
available.
  By mapping the location of seedlings and rosettes in prescribed areas of
the plots, by tagging rosettes, and by recording the progress of these
individual plants at monthly intervals, the researchers determined the usual
fate of thistles, both with and without grazing. They also recorded peak
thistle densities each year, and counted the seeds trapped in sticky traps
placed in each plot, the number of flowering heads on mature plants, and
later the number of viable seeds in the fruiting heads - adding up the
thistledown. At senescence, the plants were weighed.
  To see whether herbicide is best applied when thistle populations are
suffering high natural mortality or in seasons when their probability of
death is low, the researchers ran an additional experiment in the grazed
plot. They sprayed small replicated plots with dicamba herbicide on 31 March
1983, 30 June '83, 30 September '83, or 3 January '84, leaving one set of
plots untreated to act as a control. Densities of any seedling, rosette,
and adult thistles were determined before spraying and again in all plots
in February 1984. As fruiting heads matured, the scientists counted the
seeds produced.

 Seedling competition  

They also set up a series of seedling competition experiments in a
glasshouse, sowing two thistle seeds and two annual ryegrass seeds in the
same pots, and thistles together with sub clover in a second group of pots.
Thistles were also sown (four per pot) in the absence of a second species.
Various clipping treatments were imposed on the competing plants (not the
thistles) in the two-species pots to imitate grazing by stock, and half
the pots in each group received additional nitrogen. After 10 weeks, the
scientists dried and weighed the shoots and roots of the plants.
  Results of the study indicate that undisturbed pasture plants make life
extremely difficult for thistles. Sheep complicate matters by their selective
grazing and by inadvertently trampling on pasture plants and early life-stages
of the thistle.
  Initial (1980/81) densities of seedlings, rosettes, and adult thistles
as well as adult plant size were comparable in the two paddocks. But within
a year thistles in the sheep-stocked pasture, in which the more palatable
species has been grazed, were larger, bore more flowering heads, and produced
more seeds per head than those in the ungrazed pasture where competition
was presumably stronger. However, effects of sheep on thistle population
densities as a whole only became apparent after a few years. By 1983/84, all
life stages of the thistle from seed to adult were more abundant in the grazed
than in the ungrazed pasture (see the table at the foot of page 17).

 Grazing favours thistles - usually  

Looking at population survival, we see that thistles suffer a sort of mid-life
crisis, with the transition from seedling to rosette proving much more
hazardous than transitions from seed to seedling and rosette to adult. Whereas
10% of thistle seeds germinate successfully in ungrazed pasture to produce
seedlings, and 49% of rosettes successfully graduate to adulthood, only
0.2% of seedlings survive to form rosettes. In each case sheep aggravate
the situation, but particularly in the transition from seedling to rosette
where the success rate in grazed pasture (1%) exceeds that in ungrazed pasture
by a factor of 5 (see the table of transitions on this page).
  It seems that grazing of the non-thistle component of pastures promotes
survival of young thistles, and this is probably due mainly to lessened
competition from nearby plants after grazing - an indirect effect of sheep.
This view is strengthened by the findings of the glasshouse competition
experiments. Thistles sharing pots with sub clover or annual ryegrass weighed
less than those growing only with their comrades. Clipping of sub clover
invariably promoted growth of the associated thistles, while in the
ryegrass-thistle pots clipping had more complicated effects (see the table
opposite).
  The effect of competition from pasture plants is also reflected in the
observation that thistles in the ungrazed pasture suffered high mortality
during periods optimal for growth - autumn and spring - and by earlier research
conducted on the Northern Tablelands of New South Wales by Mr John George
and his colleagues, of the then CSIRO Division of Animal Physiology. They
found that fewer spear thistles invaded perennial pastures if there was
a lot of plant cover, and they attributed this to competition from grasses.
Thistles tend to falter when the going gets tough.
  During severe drought in 1982 and early 1983, sheep also had a direct
effect on the thistle population. Thistles were the only green plants
available to sheep and the rosettes were heavily grazed and trampled from
early winter until the sheep were removed in October. As a result, adult
thistles in the unstocked pasture significantly outnumbered those in the
grazed pasture that year.

 Thistle Management  

Do the combined results help formulate strategies for the control of spear
thistle in the Mediterranean-like grass-clover pastures of southern Australia?
Dr Forcella and Dr Wood suggest that since seedling mortality is naturally
very high after autumn rain - when competition from pasture plants is strong
- this is probably the best time to hit the weed with herbicide. Temporarily
removing stock from thistle-infested paddocks in autumn should further reduce
the number of seedlings surviving to the rosette stage.
  The study also showed that in a Mediterranean climate, at least, herbicides
like dicamba are best applied in autumn for control of seedlings and rosettes
and to depress summer seed production. This is when thistles are making
rapid growth conducive to herbicide action, and in winter and summer large
rosettes and mature plants can screen seedlings from the spray.
  In Tasmania, research by the Department of Agriculture indicated that
slender thistle (Carduus pyconocephalus and C. tenuiflorus), both usually
annuals, can also be controlled by deferral of autumn grazing. In this case,
thistles competing for light in tall (ungrazed) autumn pasture become
elongated, lush, and less prickly and so tend to be eaten by sheep in winter
and spring.
  Findings of the competition experiments also suggest that promoting the
growth of annual ryegrass rather than sub clover will depress spear thistle
under grazing. This can be achieved by using a herbicide toxic to both the
thistle and to clover (such as dicamba), although a New Zealand scientist
found that under the conditions of his experiment this depreseed lamb growth
rates. If possible, ploughing the pasture to a depth of 5-10 cm in May or
June will tend to have a similar effect on pasture composition.
  So to grasp the nettle: avoid grazing thistle-infested paddocks in autumn...
and, with luck, watch those seedlings disappear. If you intend to use
herbicides, autumn looks the best time to spray.

