Inside view  

CRISIS often produces anger. But what rural Australia needs most is a clear
head.
  THERE are no fat marathon runners. They are lean and efficient, like most
of Australian agriculture. Marathon runners have to take the long-term view:
years of work and discipline for a few hours' race. In the case of Australian
agriculture, the race is one against acute financial crisis caused by natural
disaster or market collapse.
  In today's race, no doubt some of the runners will weaken, perhaps due
to muscle fatigue, from which they will recover to run again. For others,
a basic incapacity will mean they cannot cope and must find another pursuit.
  Given the significance of the race, particularly for the participants,
the causes of weakening are worthy of investigation. Is it because of failure
on the part of the participants? Is it because of factors beyond their control?
Or is it the result of deliberate sabotage by others: officials (governments
and public servants), equipment makers (input costs) or spectators (consumers)?
  Taking the long view, Australian agriculture has clearly been a success
story. And so it will continue to be. The key to its past success has been
its capacity to change and adjust.
  In his recent Shann Memorial Lecture, Professor Fred Gruen pointed out
that the terms of trade for Australian agriculture (the ratio of prices received
to prices paid) have been slowly but steadily declining in the long term.
Yet we still have a strong, efficient, and innovative agriculture.
  To what do we owe this success? The most visible contribution has been
by those who have survived by increasing their production efficiency, by
introducing new products, or by bringing more land into production. Also
important (but perhaps more painful) has been the exit of those who, for
one reason or another, have not survived the changing market conditions.
This kind of adjustment is also part of the Australian experience and has
been important to the overall performance of the industry.
  If those ex-farmers had been encouraged to remain through wasteful methods
of support, the costs would have been paid in the long run by the rest of
the economy - consumers, taxpayers, and other industries. A clear example
of the costs of such a policy is the distortion in the domestic and
international economies created by the EEC's Common Agricultural Policy
(CAP).
  In all the heat and dust of the debate on the current "crisis" in
agriculture, one basic characteristic of the market system - a system whose
virtues are usually either implicitly assumed or explicitly extolled by
farming spokesmen - has been obscured: competition produces losers as well
as winners. The market system teaches lessons from which society learns
how to satisfy economic needs efficiently. As in any learning system, there
is trial and error. The rate of failure for non-farm new business is
particularly high; Australian research shows that about 90 per cent fail
within the first five years. The market system is characterised by instability
and change and not predictability and equilibrium, and failure is inevitable
for some. This does not mean that the community should not treat the casualties
compassionately, and recognise their problems.

 PRODUCT LIFE  

  RESEARCH on non-farm business also shows that, even if they survive the
initial period, competition from other producers eventually threatens their
market. The concept of the "product life-cycle", in which the final state
is decline, draws attention to the likelihood that eventually there will
be pressure to diversify and innovate. Perhaps in agriculture the growth
and maturity stages of the product life-cycles are so long that farmers
in the decline stage see it as an aberration rather than as inevitable.
They have been very successful in prolonging the maturity phase through
process innovation - in pasture improvement, fertilisers, pesticides, and
machinery. There has also been product innovation, as improved breeds of
livestock and new crop varieties testify.
  The next step is innovation in marketing, where there are already success
stories such as the wool industry. The red meat industry is the latest to
stress marketing and is looking at the messages it has been receiving from
the marketplace to help it assess the reasons for the decline in per capita
consumption of its product. The award in October of the 1985 Nobel Prize
for medicine to two American scientists for their work on cholesterol reminds
us that the health effects of foods will probably remain high in the
consciousness of consumers. In response to this trend, the Meat Industry
Association of NSW has recently appointed a nutritionist to ensure that
the public is informed about the nutritional value of red meat. Dr David
McKinna, engaged as a marketing consultant by the Cattle Council of Australia
and the AMLC, has recently drawn attention to the effects changing lifestyles
are having on consumers' buying decisions, in this case their desire for
convenience and variety. In a calorie-rich diet, food is taking on more
of the characteristics of fashion items. This draws attention again to the
product life-cycle. The fashion connection forced the wool industry to learn
similar lessons years earlier.
  These are all examples of the need, popularised in the management best-seller
In Search of Excellence, for farm business to get "closer to the customer".
  No longer does the truism "everyone has to eat" mean that producers and
marketers can afford to ignore the valuable information consumers can provide.
Ultimately, consumers will be heard. Greater attention to consumer needs
might well be achieved through more farmer involvement in agribusiness,
a trend discussed by Sarah Sargent in this issue.

 CONSUMER KEY  

  CONSUMERS are a key part of the audience for a new agricultural policy
that has potentially greater significance for Australian farmers than any
other of recent times. When the Bureau of Agricultural Economics (BAE) recently
took the results of its research on the costs of the CAP to Europe, its
purpose was to make clear to European consumers and taxpayers the vast cost
to them of subsidised European agriculture. This marks a significant tactical
change after years in which the Australian government tried to impress on
the EEC the costs of the CAP to Australian producers, and pleaded for a
fair go. If the swift and sharp response from the European media and
policymakers is any indication, the change in tactics has been successful
at least in drawing their attention.
  The pressure now being felt by many Australian farmers has as much to
do with depressed prices for our agricultural exports as it has with the
more visible and frequently nominated evils of cost increases, union power,
and government charges. To the extent that depressed prices are caused by
over-production stimulated by economically irrational price-support policies
and export dumping, how should Australian governments respond to pleas for
assitance from Australian producers in the short term? The federal
government, despite its rhetoric, still seems willing to provide special
assistance to some industries, such as dairy and sugar, when their problems
are acute. Governments have to be careful that in responding to real financial
hardship they do not inhibit long-run adjustment to a lean and efficient
agriculture. It can be argued that we should at least be slow to wind back
any industries efficient by world standards on the grounds that in the long
run this efficiency will be rewarded when other governments can no longer
afford the cost of supporting their less efficient producers. One positive
response here would be to initiate rational debate in the way the BAE has
recently done in Europe.
  The long-term adjustment of agriculture involving the exit of firms from the 
industry, usually happens slowly and quietly without drawing public attention. 
But occasionally several pressures coincide to create what can be identified 
and promoted as a "crisis". Farmers have been going broke almost continuously 
over the years, and for those involved such failure is a crisis. The human 
effects are the same, and they are profound: bewilderment, frustration, and 
loss of self-esteem, not to mention the economic and intangible costs of 
moving, changing occupation, and learning about a completely new environment. 
At such times we find no stirring of the national conciousness 
by opportunist media and political snake-oil merchants. But a brilliantly 
organised demonstration of 30,000 people in front of Parliament House on the 
day of the tax summit? Now that's a crisis!
  What can be done for those farm families facing acute hardship because
of inadequate income, with all the human misery that brings? Equity demands
that no less is done for them than for the officially unemployed, whose
families are plunged into similar crises. It might be time to consider
temporary income support, perhaps of one year and non-repayable, to allow
their families to avoid the worst consequences of poverty and to give
them a breathing space to think about the future. This is clearly a welfare
treatment for a welfare problem, and the stigma that many farmers attach
to such relief would have to be overcome with sensitivity. The Rural
Development Centre has put a lot of thought into this problem, and its
suggestions are contained in the McKay Report on the grape and wine industries.
  It is natural to feel angry when one's stability and livelihood appear
to be threatened by forces beyond control. It is natural also to look for
people to blame. But anger alone does not solve problems, and anger misdirected
is not constructive. It can blind us to a proper perception of the problem,
its causes, and its possible solutions. For many farmers, a Labor government
must present a natural target. It has been reported that the NSW Livestock
and Grain Producers' Association has resolved to try to bring about the
defeat of the federal government. While the LGPA's strategy to help farmers
is broader than this, if this objective comes to be seen as the chief use
of farmers' anger, then a chance will be lost to convince the community
that the solutions to present problems involve more than getting a preferred
government into power.

 ANGRY EXPRESSIONS  

  SOME expressions of the current anger and frustration may appear foreign
to those who appreciate the value of some Australian traditions. For example,
a leading farmers' journal recently had a picture of a hand grenade on its
cover, captioned "Rural Australia: Ready to explode", perhaps intended be a dramatic metaphor for today's mood. Inside, it reported a farm leader's
warning that "blood will flow" in a fight with unions. The observer of conflict
in other countries is reminded sadly of Beirut and Belfast, where a hand
grenade is no mere symbol, and where inflammatory words are dangerously
irresponsible. An important aspect of our luck as Australians is to live
in a socially cohesive country. Not the least benefit of such social cohesion,
incidentally, is its contribution to economic efficiency.
  Australia is lucky in that it has had no invasions for 200 years, no civil
wars, famines, military coups, or arbitrary and sinister denials of political
rights.
  Social cohesion has also been forged by the potency of our bush values:
compassion and generosity in the face of natural disaster, tolerance, slowness
to anger, the ability to see the other person's point of view, scepticism
about the bluster of the demagogue, and about authority in general. 
It does not seem to fit that rural Australia, which has contributed much that 
is truly recognisable and attractive in the Australian character, might now
be encouraged to foment and exploit what some find convenient to portray
as irreconcilable divisions between groups in our community.
  A political scientist, Kathryn West of Melbourne University, has drawn
attention to some concerns farmers have in common with small business
operators. Her solutions are presented in a headline (Rydges, September
1985) as "Abolish the dole, stomp the militants, kill the compromisers,
save the family". The headline surely does less than justice to her
analysis. But the issues are too important and there is too much of substance
that has to be genuinely faced in the policy debate for the discussion to
be trivialised, the protagonists polarised, and the solutions oversimplified.

