Farmers drive a new coalition of businessmen against Hawke  

Nineteen eighty-seven, says DAVID BARNETT, will see the emergence of a dynamic
new political group of business interests - possibly a new party - taking
its lead from the New Right and not only threatening the Labor government
but also the Opposition parties.

BUSINESS organisations are cranking up to end the Hawke government in 1987-88
and none is more motivated and mobilised than the New Right's spearhead,
the National Farmers Federation, whose leader, Ian McLachlan, has united
a broad spectrum of powerful industry groups.
  The fringe benefits tax, trade union superannuation, interest rates and
Labor's industrial and fiscal policies are to be critically bombarded.
McLachlan has provided the impetus for the setting up of a whole range of
new political structures. Committees are being formed in the marginaL seats.
They say money has been raised and more is coming in. Nineteen eightyseven
will be the year of the New Right. It may be Bob Hawke's last year as Prime
Minister. If it is not it could be the last year of the Liberal Party as
it now exists, and the same can be said for the National Party.
  If the coalition parties do not succeed at the next elections, when they
are held some time between March 1987 and March 1988, the mood, the money
and the structures are there to pave the way for a new conservative party,
with pressure going on industry leaders such as Ian McLachlan and John Elliott
to enter political life.
  But on present indications it is highly unlikely to come to that. The
Bulletin's Morgan Gallup Polls show that Hawke's budget session strategy
has failed. The government went into the budget session with the polls last
August showing support for the coalition at 50 percent and support for
Labor at 40 percent. By mid-November the government had narrowed the
Opposition's lead to 1 point. They were trailing 44-45.
  Hawke, the Treasurer, Paul Keating, and the ministry set out to discredit
Opposition Leader John Howard and his colleagues by means of personal attack,
with the aim of producing a gory Liberal Party upheaval, and a challenge
from Andrew Peacock, setting the scene for an election in March or April
next year based on the inability of the coalition to present a united front
and a coherent set of policies. For that strategy to succeed, Hawke needed
the level of government support to continue its rise, overtaking Howard's
coalition during the end-of-year holidays, and it needed the Liberal Party 
to fall apart.
  The Liberals did not fall apart. Instead, some unknown well-wisher sent
them a copy of a letter to Keating from the Taxation Commissioner about
his unfiled tax returns, striking a dramatic and devastating blow at Keating's
standing in the electorate.
  The day Hawke learnt that the Morgan Poll was showing a recovery in support
for the coalition to 48 points, and a fall in support for his government
back to 42 points, was the day McLachlan as president of the National Farmers
Federation came to Canberra to see him. McLachlan's appointment, originally
for 2.30pm, had to be put off for 3 1/2 hours because cabinet was still
wrestling with the problem of logging Jackey's Marsh. It had earlier dealt
with Rupert Murdoch's takeover offer for the Herald and Weekly Times, and
Keating's submission for clearing his proposals for the double taxation of
company dividends, so they do not produce the host of unintended and adverse
consequences which have marked all the other proposals in the package of
business taxes.
  When McLachlan was shown into the cabinet room, he found Hawke shaking
with rage. Hawke berated him for having talked to the media on the way into
the meeting and for having made public his submission to the government.
He refused to discuss the Farmers Federation's concerns and stalked out
after five minutes, leaving Keating to evict McLachlan, which he did with
an insult to McLachlan about seeking publicity instead of pursuing the
interests of farmers.
  McLachlan is a central figure in the New Right groundswell which is
transforming the business community. Under his leadership, the Farmers
federation has so raised its profile that it ranks as a major political
institution, backed by $15 million raised by popular subscription for a
fighting fund which gives it enormous financial solidity.
  The federation has devised a five-point strategy for 1987 designed to
advance the economic and political interests of the nation's 170,000 farmers
and their families. It has commissioned the former director of the Bureau
of Agricultural Economics, Andy Stoekel, to survey global markets for
Australian rural produce and recommend on where the efforts of the marketing
corporations should best be directed. It has decided in principle to
commission a lobbyist to watch out for Australian rural interests in
Washington, and it has commissioned a series of studies (which Stoekel will
also carry out) of the economies of countries which subsidise their rural
sectors heavily, such as Japan and the United States, along the lines of
an earlier study of the European Community, to draw out the hidden costs
to living standards of such subsidies.
  Apart from filling vacuums created by government inactivity, two aspects
of the Farmers Federation's strategy for the year are of direct political
relevance to the Hawke government. The federation has $1 million a year
in interest from its fighting fund to back the private sector against the
trade unions in disputes such as Mudginberri, which is continuing because of
an appeal, and Dollar Sweets. About 40 percent of the fighting fund came
from secondary industry, and the Farmers Federation, accordingly, will
not confine its backing to the rural sector. It is also setting up committees
in the marginal seats to question candidates about their attitudes towards
economic and industrial issues.
  The federation sees the committee as long-term, and it is their intention
to influence not only the result of elections through campaigning and
advertising, but also to be able to influence the preselection of candidates
for all parties.
  The Australian Small Business Association, which is only three years
old, operates on the basis of a mass membership, and so far has acquired
7000, of whom 2500 were enrolled between June and September, because of
concern about the fringe benefits tax. The association wants 20,000 members
by the end of 1987. It contributed $30,000 towards the Mudginberri fighting
fund, and lately has responded to union picket lines with its own counter
picketing, modelling itself on the United States National Federation of
Independent Businesses, which has 750,000 members, and the Canadian Federation
of Independent Businesses which has 55,000 members. Counter pickets were
used in the La Trobe Valley against intimidation by the Building Workers
Industrial Union and in Deniliquin, against the Australian Meat Industries
Employees Union.
  They say that once they have sufficient members, they will just opt out
of the present industrial system, refusing to acknowledge the authority
of the federal and state tribunals and negotiating directly with employees.
  In the meantime, the Small Business Association is also setting up
organisations in the marginal electorates to support "pro-business"
candidates. 
  The Australian Tourism Industry Association has identified 14 areas which
it regards as vital to tourism and is developing a strategy for its approach
to marginal seats. Many are also seats where tourism is economically
significant. The strategy is to concentrate the level of interest rates
and industrial issues, particularly penalty rates.
  The chairman of the Australian Federation of Employers Andrew Hay is
endeavoring to achieve some coordination of activities through
21 affiliated organisations, which include the Farmers Federation, Small
Business Association and the Tourism Industry Association, but at this
stage coordination is not a problem. They are all determinedly marching
in much the same direction, basically that outlined in the paper which
McLachlan gave Hawke, and which Hawke refused to discuss.
  McLachlan's submission argued that the government's budget strategy had
failed, and that it was no longer tolerable, either for farmers or for
the business community, to operate with interest rates at 20 percent, as
they have been for the past 15 months. He wants Hawke to freeze wages for
at least one year and possibly for two and to drastically wind back government
expenditure. McLachlan says that supporting the dollar by holding interests
rates up without controlling either wages or government spending is no longer
tenable.
  Hawke's problem is that he already knows all that for himself but, for
party political reasons, won't do anything about it. Not only does he not
contemplate a wages freeze, but he has stepped aside from the hard slog
of expenditure control. He has decided not to chair the Expenditure Review  
Committee which spends at least five months each year going through ministerial
expenditure bids.
  The decisions about how much money is spent each year on defence, education,
pensions, the environment and so on are formally made by the full cabinet
and announced in the budget, but the allocations do come from the Review
Committee, whose work is central to the conduct of government.
  Yet it is this process from which Hawke has withdrawn. Instead, he will
devote his energies to being a publicist, campaigning non-stop for the next
election with speeches, interviews, radio talk shows and public appearances.
Hawke is no longer trying to run the country. He is leaving that to his
colleagues. Instead he is trying to get his government re-elected.
  The polling which showed that the government's standing had slipped back
also showed that Keating and the fringe benefits tax are both electoral
liabilities. Keating's own standing has slumped since the controversy
about his private finances, while more people are against the fringe benefits
tax than are for it - 47 to 44 percent.
  The government's skilful advertising campaign has had some effect. Five
months ago the number disagreeing with the FBT was 5 percent higher. But
51 percent, up 7, believe the beneficiary should pay the tax, not the employer,
and 34 percent of Labor voters are against the tax, which has stirred up
strikes all the way from the Pilbara to the banks. The Morgan polls suggest
the tax is both a prime reason for the slide in the government's popularity
and an indication that the government is in an unwinnable position.
  Howard's strategy for 1986 was to discredit the government's economic
management, a task in which he could not easily fail. His strategy for 1987
is to convince the electorate that the comparatively youthful and not
particularly well-known front-bench which he leads is a credible alternative
to the government, and that he has credible alternative policies.
  He has called a meeting of shadow ministers for the first week in February
to finalise a new batch of policies, more for the sake of appearances than
anything else. The crucial industrial policy, with its measured approach
to deregulation, is already announced and he is hanging on to his tax policy
until it is too late for the government to pre-empt its more palatable bits.
He also has to continue to isolate Peacock and his small band of supporters
and to live with the mysterious polls which appear from time to time,
commissioned by unknown persons, and which consistently rediscover that
he lacks charisma. Howard has decided that he can live with this.
  (The latest Morgan Gallup Poll - see page 29 - shows that Howard has failed
to make any impression on the electorate's view of the Liberal leadership.)
  Hawke and Keating were tempted by the November trade figures to spy the
first swallow in an economic summer, despite the question mark placed over
them by the Statistician. The deficit fell sharply to $635 million from
$1578 million in October, which itself had been revised downwards from a
record $1.7 billion.
  The figures were treated with scepticism by the media and with derision
by the Opposition.
  They showed that the deficit on merchandise trade, when smoothed and
seasonally adjusted through the Statistician's computer, was down to $140
million, and that there has been a progressive improvement in this deficit
since June, when it was $368 million.
                                     
