Kakadu: paradise in peril By Alan Attwood  

Can the federal government have its park and mine it, too?

  In shoes better suited to Parliament House corridors than dry stony scrub,
Barry Cohen was taking a close look at the Olgas, second-most popular
attraction in Uluru National Park. The Minister for Arts, Heritage and
Environment was exploring his portfolio at the grassroots level and recording
the experience with a video camera. A station wagon sped by on the nearby
red dirt road to Ayers Rock, leaving billowing dust in its wake. "Perhaps
what we need here, Barry," said Professor Derrick Ovington, director of
the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service, "is a monorail."
  The look on Cohen's face was similar to the expression favored
by New South Wales Premier Barrie Unsworth when he hears the word byelection.
Cohen spent the next few minutes shaking his head in amazement. What next
- a lift to the top of Ayers Rock? Then it struck him that Ovington, an
eminently reasonable man who is on Uluru's board of management, was not
joking. Nor was Chip Morgan, the park superintendent and another reasonable
man. As a second car went by stirring up more red dust he noted how much
less mess a monorail might make. Cohen returned to his car with far more
to think about than sore feet.
  A monorail is not going to be built at Uluru; certainly not while Cohen
is minister, and probably never. No matter how many arguments are posited
about lack of dust or noise, cartoonists and conservationists would pillory
anyone brave or foolish enough to authorize it. But even the possibility
of such a project being raised is indicative of increasing pressures on
the Uluru and Kakadu National Parks, both visited by Cohen recently. The
ancient landscapes have fallen on modern times; the ruggedly beautiful
parks are being regarded less as wilderness areas and more as resources
for tourism, recreation and commercial ventures - all of which must be balanced
with Aboriginal interests in the land. Although a monorail can be dismissed
as a chimera, the question of mining cannot.
  The mere thought of mining in Uluru caused Cohen on his recent trip to
endorse a suggestion by Yami Lester, Aboriginal elder and chairman of the
Uluru board of management, that the park should be nominated for inclusion
on UNESCO's list of world heritage properties. This followed a submission
from the Northern Territory government on the proposed plan of management
for Uluru, in central Australia, which suggested that the possibility of
exploration and mining in the park should not be precluded. In response,
Lester described the NT government as "a bunch of cowboys, interested only
in quick bucks," and Cohen privately expressed his opinion that certain
NT ministers would "mine the gold in their grandmothers' mouths if they
got a chance."
  Thus there was considerable piquancy in the news that Cohen had received a 
letter from Prime Minister Bob Hawke expressing his concern that the proposed
plan of management for Kakadu, 200 km southeast of Darwin, did not make 
provision for any future recovery of minerals. In two weeks Cohen had moved 
from the tranquillity of a bush trip into controversy, seemingly defending a 
besieged environment not only from northern marauders but also aggressors 
within his own camp. It may have made him appreciate the prescience of Justice
Russell Fox who, in his second report on the Ranger uranium project in
1977, said of the Kakadu area: "Possibly no other part of Australia is faced
with as many strong and concurrent competing claims for the use of the
land as this region."
  At issue is the proposed stage three extension of Kakadu, consisting
of about 6,000 sq km from the Gimbat and Goodparla pastoral leases. (Stage
one of Kakadu, including 6,144 sq km, was proclaimed on April 5,1979.
In 1980 it became the first part of Australia to be included on the world
heritage list. Stage two, containing 6,929 sq km in the north, was proclaimed
on February 28, 1984.) At the opening of the present parliament, the government
announced its intention to extend the park. The proposed stage three would
take into the park virtually all the water catchments of the South Alligator
River system that feeds into Kakadu wet lowlands, rich with birdlife. In
his 1977 recommendations on the development of the region, Fox stated: "It
is desirable to include at least one large total catchment in a regional
national park ... the South Alligator River catchment is clearly the most
suitable." The problem for Cohen and his ministerial colleagues is that
this same region is being regarded by mineral exploration companies as
a potentially rich source of gold and platinum. And while the proposed Kakadu
plan of management states that a main objective "is to protect the park's
resources from exploitation," it also acknowledges that mineral leases issued
before the declaration of the park should be respected. Such a lease is
that held by Coronation Hill joint venturers, with the major partners being
BHP and the Canadian-based mining company Noranda Australia. Located near
the South Alligator River, the mine would be in the park under Kakadu's
stage three extension. The question is: Can the government have its park
and mine it too?
  Barry Cohen describes as one of the few mystical experiences of his life
a helicopter ride he once made over the Kakadu wetlands as thousands of
magpie geese rose as one from the water. But his first view of the Coronation
Hill site during his recent trip did not inspire rhapsody. From the helicopter
as it circled the scarred hill the prospect was of dry
olive-colored scrub and ochre abrasions. The uranium mine
that was worked on the site from 1955 to 1961 resisted encroachment by the 
surrounding bush: still visible are the disused shafts and tailing heaps.
Waiting to greet the minister were four men from BHP, led by Richard Carter,
the company's general manager for resource planning and development. Wearing
a peaked cap and sunglasses against the midday glare, Carter made a
presentation replete with charts and figures about what had been done in
the way of mineral exploration. At the end of 1984 the old data from the
mine was reassessed; since then exploratory drilling in the area has been
carried out. What has been found are significant quantities of gold - an
average of five grams per tonne. There are also workable amounts of palladium
and platinum and BHP believes there are diamonds and silver.
  
  Carter showed a perspiring minister a map with an area of about 60 km by
20 km colored red and marked "Potential Exploration Area", although
he added that present exploration is being done in an area measuring only
400 m by 150 m. Asked by the National Parks' Ovington why the joint venturers
were not interested in a less controversial area, given the environmental
sensitivity of the South Alligator region, Carter replied, "I would rather
dig in a place I know there is gold." This year the Coronation Hill joint
venturers will spend well over $A2 million on exploration and research.
They hope that by next year they will know if a mining operation is feasible,
and also that the future of the region has been decided by the government.
Not unnaturally, the miners would like some return for their investment,
but once again Cohen has reason to recall Fox, who wrote of difficulties
being accentuated "because companies were encouraged to explore, and were
encouraged in the belief that mining would be allowed, before environmental
consequences were fully examined. Great care should therefore be taken
to ensure that no expectations are raised that further mining development will
be permitted." In a confidential submission to Cohen on the project the joint
venturerers wrote: "We believe the Coronation Hill deposit has less
environmental problems than many other mines in Australia." But Ovington
and conservationists doubt if any mining operations could be contained.
If there was any leakage of noxious materials into the river system feeding
into the park, damage to the ecosystem could be incalculable. This is why
one proposal about the future of the Coronation Hill project - that it be
excised from any stage three extension of the park, just as the Ranger
uranium mine is inside the park but officially not part of it - makes more
academic than practical sense.
  On the question of Coronation Hill specifically and, more generally,
exploration for minerals in the park - even if, as mining groups maintain,
it is just to ascertain what is there - Cohen faces such disparate opponents
as NT Chief Minister Steve Hatton, National Party Leader Ian Sinclair,
Resources and Energy Minister Gareth Evans and the Prime Minister himself
who, while denying reports that the government was considering further uranium
mining in the park, does not want to preclude exploration for other minerals.
A semblance of unity was achieved on Sunday when Cohen and Evans co-issued a
statement discussing how "overwhelmingly important national economic
interests" could be balanced with "one of the most beautiful and important
parts of our whole natural and cultural heritage"; but their portfolios -
Resources and Environment - are uneasy bedfellows.
  Although mining has dominated recent discussion about the future of national
parks, in the long term, other issues such as booming tourism (increasing
at Uluru annually by about 10%; at Kakadu about 30%) and the delicate juggling
act involved in reconciling black and white claims on the land, will warrant
equal attention. The parks are old, but not indestructible. As cabinet met
this week off Sydney aboard HMAS Stalwart there were reports that Hawke
faced a backbench revolt on the question of mining in Kakadu. One matter
before cabinet was Kakadu stage three. It was hard not to feel that the
government's parks policy, like the cabinet itself, was all at sea.
 
 