<subsample>
	<id> F04b </id>
	


	<source> Good Government - February 1986 </source>
	


	<h> IS DEMOCRACY POSSIBLE? </h>
	


	<bl> Professor John Burnheim </bl>
	


	<misc> Professor John Burnheim is from the Department of General Philosophy,
University of Sydney. </misc>
	


	<h> The Problem of the State </h>
	

  Surely we have democracy! Not if it means that all citizens have an equal
chance of an active participation in public affairs. What we have is a
competition between organised political elites for the majority vote, which
gives them the right to govern. We elect professional power-brokers who
trade with each other their votes and patronage. The results of the game
are determined by concentrating power in organisations which are not
controlled directly by the people affected by their activities - political
parties, commercial organisations, lobby groups of all sorts and so on.
These in turn attempt to manipulate public opinion and voting behaviour,
especially the relatively small group of `swinging voters' in marginal
electorates. On the whole the power of the electorate is limited to refusing
to re-elect a government that offends these strategically placed bodies
of voters. It is a far better system than any of its actual competitors,
but it has very serious weaknesses. 
  The central problem is that it rests on an assumption that public life
must be organised in the form of States which exercise sovereignty over
every aspect of life in a given territory through their monopoly of legitimate
force. The system of States normally ensures a sort of peace and order within
each State, but at the cost of a perpetual tendency to war between States.
Internal peace is achieved at the price of a concentration of power that
breeds abuse of power. Rival groups strive to use State power to their own
ends, and in doing so constantly tend to increase the range of functions
of the State and the range of means at its disposal. Social life becomes
more and more standardised, bureaucratised and mystified. The tasks of
government become increasingly more difficult and as they fail in those
tasks governments are drawn into repression and war.
  Advocates of `small government' contrast the efficiency and responsiveness
of the market with the inflexiblity, expense and stifling effects of
bureaucracy. But the market, too, is far from democracy. If it enables
us to have a more flexible say in what we get as consumers, it gives most
of us very little opportunity as producers. Most of us simply sell to somebody
else the right to tell us what to do in our work. Moreover, the market
cannot take account of things like the needs of future generations, the
provision of public goods, or the righting of wrongs. One may argue endlessly
about its scope, but there must be a `public sector'.
  One of the crucial powers of the State is that of taxation. I believe,
in sympathy with Henry George, that public revenue should come from the
revenue from natural resources, though I envisage the way in which this would
best happen and its rationale somewhat differently. The power to tax should,
if possible, be eliminated.


	<h> Functional Decentralisation </h>
	

  In the context of the State public goods of all sorts are provided by
centralised authorities at each level of government. Even at the local city,
municipal or shire level a large range of functions, e.g. roads, parks
and recreation facilities, health clinics, libraries, building regulations,
waste collection and so on are provided by a centralised body, even though
there is no reason in terms of the functions themselves for doing so. The
problems of libraries are quite different from those of garbage collection,
and each has more affinity with similar activities in other areas than with
each other. Moreover, granted modern mobility and the diversity of people's
work and recreational interests, the local community hardly exists. We
belong to many different specialised communities that overlap each other
in a host of differing and fluid patterns.
  The diverse activities that are joined together at municipal level
are united solely by the need for administrative and financial control.
Would it not be better to hand each over to a committee of people who had
an interest in that specific activity? That way we would abolish a level
of bureacracy, allow more flexible allocation of geographical boundaries
to various activities, and increase the opportunities of popular participation.
  The same principle can be applied at every level of government, right
up to international level. The idea of a world State is horrifying. But
there are already some international agencies that exercise considerable
authority in specific areas without being dependent on any higher body.
The functions of States could be dispersed to a variety of independent
bodies. Naturally, these would have to cooperate among themselves and recognise
appropriate regulatory and adjudicating bodies which would hear appeals
against them, adjust their constitutions in tune with changing circumstances
and needs, and resolve disputes between them. Insofar as these higher bodies
need co-ordination in turn, it would not be a matter of some higher power
forcing them to obey its injunctions but of a recognised arbitrating body
settling disputes brought before it. The sanction on bodies that refused
to accept arbitration would be the refusal of other bodies to cooperate with
them. Since each specialised body would need the cooperation of many other
bodies in many ways, the sanctions could be very powerful. There would be
no self-sufficient or sovereign bodies at any level.


	<h> Democracy by Statistical Representation </h>
	

  Supposing that it is in fact possible to break up the bodies that provide
various public needs into specialised functional agencies of this sort,
how is it possible to control them democratically? Elections would not
be satisfactory. Each of us has some interest in an enormous range of
activities, not because we are actively involved in them, but because they
affect us in varying degrees. Because we cannot know much about the various
policies that might be pursued in all these areas, the candidates seeking
office or the practical problems of doing anything to change things, we
would not make an intelligent vote in most cases. Moreover, granted the
extreme unlikelihood of our vote making any difference to the outcome,
it would not be sensible to try. On the other hand, most of us could get
to know and understand quite a lot about a few of the activities that affect
us if we had any incentive to do the necessary work, if we had a substantial
chance of having a significant say in the matter.
  In the absence of such opportunities there is little we can do in most
cases except vote for a party ticket. At least a party endorsement tells
us something about a candidate. But that puts power back in the hands of
party machines, powerful lobbies and the professional image makers. Politics
becomes a career and careers depend on patronage. The power game takes over
at the expense of substantive issues.
  The alternative is that representatives be chosen not by voting, which
is a very poor way of conveying and aggregating information, but by a
statistical procedure that ensures that the representatives are representative
of those affected by the decisions they will have to make, weighted to take
account of the importance of the varying ways in which different groups
are affected. The representatives would need to display an interest in being
chosen by nominating for selection, and one would expect that in most areas
there would be a good chance of a candidate getting a turn on the relevant
committee sooner or later.
  So it would be worth their while to try to find out as much*muct as possible
about the activities in which they expressed an interest and follow the
proceedings of that committee. Moreover, one might expect that such committees
would be more responsive to suggestions and criticism than politicians or
bureaucrats as we know them.
  Members on each committee would be replaced one by one at regular intervals
in order to ensure continuity. Political organisations might, of course,
urge their members to nominate for various committees in the hope of
influencing their decisions. But they would not have the power over their
members that parties now have, since there would be no place for endorsement,
advancement or patronage. It would be very difficult, too, for these committees
to become corrupt, since the membership would be constantly changing in
a random way, and those who had served on the committees would probably keep
a keen eye on their successors. If the committee veered too much in a certain
direction that would stimulate a rash of nominations from people of the
opposite tendency for the next round of sortition.
 

	<h> Market Socialism </h>
	

  The higher level bodies which would  allocate resources, adjudicate disputes,
hear appeals and so on would be chosen by lot from a pool of people nominated
by their peers on lower level bodies as having the qualities necessary for
these more difficult tasks. There are obviously many ways in which various
social systems might work using such a framework.
  My own preference would be for a `market socialism' in which each of the
major natural and accumulated resources would be entrusted to committees
of trustees who would lease them out to entrepreneurs, whether individual,
companies or cooperatives under conditions designed to protect the
environment, the public interest and the interests of posterity.


</subsample>
