<sample>
	<id> F05 </id>
	


	<source> Cleo - November 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2007 words </note>
	

 
	<h> What's childbirth really like? Six women tell the truth </h>
	

The stories about giving birth are many and varied. No two experiences are
the same. Here, six women tell it as it really was.


	<bl> By Tina Harris </bl>
	


	<h> GAYNOR WHEATLEY, 28, TIM, 2, AND SAMANTHA,1 </h>
	

&quot;How can I get this over fast?&quot;
&quot;When I was pregnant I went to classes run by physios. You learnt to pant
politely and distract yourself when things got tough by counting dots on
the wall. They also wouldn't let you use the word pain. We would have
contractions, not pains. Well, I reckon whatever you call it, it still hurts.
If they could mix me a cocktail of pethidine*pethadine, panadol and gas, I'd 
take it in one hit and hope to pass out. With my first baby, Tim, I went to 
hospital where I was to be induced. The contractions began about an hour after
I was induced and I took everything they could give me. Glenn, my husband,
was there - probably wishing he wasn't - but it was great to have an
intermediary to plead for me. One nurse kept pushing my tummy really hard.
I said, `Please don't.' She just seemed not to hear me, so I said to Glenn,
`Tell her if she had a dreadful pain in her stomach, she would hate someone
doing this to her,' so Glenn said to the nurse, `I think you're annoying
her. Why don't you go and make yourself a cuppa?' She disappeared, thank
heaven. I know you're supposed to think how wonderful all this is, but I
could only think `How can I get this over with fast?' When Tim was born
and they put him on my tummy, that instant love thing didn't happen. He
was a stranger. I wished they'd take this incredible goobie thing away
and clean it up and give me a cuppa. It wasn't till next day that I held
him and thought, `Wow! This little thing is mine.'
  &quot;I'm having my third soon, so, in spite of what I'm saying about birth,
I think it's worthwhile in the end.&quot; (A few days after this interview Gaynor
gave birth to a daughter.)

If there is any such thing as the text-book birth, it is the one where the
first stage of labour begins with irregular contractions. You might just
feel tightening of the tummy muscles and a slightly uncomfortable sensation
in the stomach or back. This may go on for hours or days. Then the contractions
become stronger and more regular. When they are about 10 minutes apart,
you ring your doctor, probably go to hospital, and after some time enter
the second stage where you experience an overwhelming urge to push with the 
contractions, give birth to the baby, then expel*expell the placenta. That's
what the book says!
  When the day comes though, there seems to be as many variations on this
theme as there are women giving birth. Nearly everyone makes some deviation
from the pattern, ranging from trivial or funny to downright frightening.
Women are urged to think of giving birth as an exciting experience that
is both natural and beautiful, and while very few mothers would deny all
three adjectives aptly describe the event, most would have a few of their
own to add. Labour is an adventure that is probably more enjoyable in the
recounting than in the experience. Like the best of adventures it presents,
along with the interesting and the unexpected, the routine, but it may
also have its alarming moments. You experience anticipation, exhaustion,
determination, maybe even despair. Then progress, intense excitement, a
surge of power, triumph and peace. Peace and love of a magnitude you've
never imagined. You are in a zone all of your own.
  No one could honestly rave about the physical joys of labour and most
mothers manage to truly forget the level of discomfort, but the hours of
labour are more than balanced by the heights of emotional pleasure reached 
when you at last feel that new life wriggling in your arms instead of in your 
tummy. It is indescribably special to be cuddling the world's most important 
baby. Cleo spoke to six women about their experiences leading up to that 
special moment.


	<h> PEPPIE ANGLISS, 26, AND DAUGHTER KOBI,1 </h>
	

&quot;I gave birth squatting in the water.&quot;
&quot;I once saw a Russian film about giving birth in the water and decided
that would be the thing for me. I was a swimming teacher and surfer and
have a great affinity with the water. I continued to swim a lot when I
became pregnant - two years after I saw the film.
  &quot;The first sign that Kobi was coming was the water breaking one night.
I went to the doctor next morning and he said if the contractions didn't
start soon I would have to go to hospital. I began pacing the floor and
saying to the baby, 'Please hurry up or we'll both finish up in a bright,
clanging hospital theatre'. I so much wanted the birth to be quiet and natural
and the pool was right there - in the next room at my doctor's birthing
centre.
  &quot;Luckily, the contractions began and became strong very quickly. I felt
I had to get straight into the water even though it hadn't had time to warm
up properly. My teeth chattered to begin with but I felt relief from the
intensity of the pain immediately because I was relaxing beautifully with
the feeling of weightlessness. My husband, Rod, was with me all the time
in the pool. I gave birth squatting in the water. The midwife leant in and
we gently raised Kobi to the surface. I'd been in the pool two hours or
so and the water had heated to body temperature. It was beautifully
comfortable. Kobi was so relaxed. She just opened her eyes and looked at
us. We stayed in the pool another 40 minutes while she floated peacefully,
then Rod carried her from the water and the doctor helped me out. We lay
down, but I didn't sleep. I was too excited.&quot;


	<h> LYA SHAKED, 32, AND SON EZRA, 18 MONTHS </h>
	

  &quot;I wouldn't say it was painful.&quot;
&quot;As a lay midwife I have worked with about 150 births myself. I know that
for me, home is the best place to have a baby. I prefer to be with people
who trust and support me - this doesn't always happen in hospitals.
  &quot;When you give birth at home you would normally have a doctor, a registered
midwife, possibly a childbirth educator and, of course, your husband. That's
what I had for my first two, but with the third, Ezra, things were very
quick. We would have had a doctor and midwife if it were necessary but
there were no surprises. Things went very smoothly - there were only three
hours between the first contractions that woke me around 4am and the birth.
When I began to feel twinges with the contractions I tried to wake Ian. He'd
had a very hard day and I couldn't stir him, so I woke my daughter and
she sat with me as the contractions got stronger.
  &quot;My body was working very hard over the short period of time. The physical
build-up to the birth was very intense. I wouldn't say it was painful. When
the water burst Ian had woken up. Ezra came very quickly and we delivered
him together. I was kneeling on the floor. After the birth I got the shivers
and shakes. I think I was in mild shock because the birth had been so fast.
I knelt there holding the baby till I stopped shaking. Ian wrapped us both
in a blanket.
  &quot;It was another hour before the placenta came. We gave Ezra a Le Boyer
bath and I had a wash. Then we all went back to bed and rested. You seem
to get the most wonderfully calming feeling after giving birth.&quot;


	<h> ANNE STEPHEN, 26, AND SON RY, 10 WEEKS </h>
	

  &quot;I felt pain but nothing I couldn't control.&quot;

&quot;When I was about seven months pregnant with Ry I was support partner for
a girlfriend who gave birth with the aid of acupuncture. I could see it
was really helping with the pain. I decided then and there to have it, too,
to hasten my labour and help me control the pain. Despite plans to have
my first child, Kim, at a birthing centre, things had gone wrong. I finished
up in theatre with spinal block injections, forceps, the works. I didn't
want that to happen again.
  &quot;I went to hospital at 4pm one Sunday - the contractions I'd been having
all day had become regular. When I got there, they stopped! I had one hour
of frustration and was getting quite emotional with the disappointment
of it all, when the acupuncturist arrived to induce me.
  &quot;I probably had about 12 needles in various parts of my body. There were
three in each foot and one in each hand between the thumb and first finger.
Others were moved around - ears, knees ... You don't feel them.
  &quot;After one hour I was having regular three-minute contractions. During
the contractions I felt pain, but nothing I couldn't control, and between
them I felt terrific. I was eating sandwiches and drinking orange juice.
It was wonderful to feel so alert.
  &quot;When the second stage of labour started they removed the needles so I
could move about and give birth on my hands and knees. Ry was born only
three hours after the acapuncture had begun. It was all very exciting.&quot;


	<h> WENDY SKELTON, 35, WITH TWINS DANIEL AND TIM, NEARLY 4 </h>
	

  &quot;I think I began to panic... It was enormously confusing.&quot;
&quot;I don't think I've ever actually recovered from the birth of the twins.
It was the most enormous shock because all through the pregnancy I had no
idea I was carrying two children.
  &quot;The labour itself was very calm and uneventful - after about 11 to 13
hours of the normal build-up, Daniel was delivered. The doctor lay him on
my tummy and I remember thinking `What a small baby!'. He was small - only
two kilos. Then the doctor went white and looked shocked. He said, `Hold
on. I think there's another one there'. It was a wonder they hadn't heard
the two heartbeats before this. I was stunned. My first thought was very
selfish. After that beautiful release you experience after giving birth,
all I could think was, `Oh no! Surely I'm not going to start all over again'.
  &quot;All of a sudden the room seemed to fill with more and more people. They
put me on a drip to help strengthen the contractions for the second birth.
I knew I had to try to keep my mind on pushing at the right time, but there
was a flurry of thoughts running through my head. How would our daughter
Rebecca cope with two babies in the family? I heard my husband, Russell,
sounding very excited because it was twins. I think I began to panic. Nine
minutes after Daniel was born, Tim arrived. After expecting one baby for
nine months I'd had nine minutes to get used to the idea of twins. It was
enormously confusing.&quot;


	<h> JOANNA STEWART, 43, WITH CHRISTOPHER, 3 </h>
	

  &quot;I became frightened something was wrong with the baby.&quot;
&quot;When I was about four days overdue, tests showed Christopher wasn't getting
enough food through the placenta, so my gynaecologist decided to induce
me. I went into labour 30 minutes later. I could feel the contractions in
my back. I had tubes up my nose - for oxygen, I suppose - and a monitor
in my tum listening to Christopher. I felt like something from Mars.
  &quot;At 11am they gave me an epidural and around 12.30 I sensed quite a lot
seemed to be going on. They rang my gynaecologist and he came and looked
at the miles and miles of sheets that were coming out of the machine
monitoring Christopher's heartbeat.


</sample>
