"I'm PREGNANT ... and i don't know what to do"  

"It could never happen to me..." So many girls fool themselves like this.
The truth is, one in 20 teenage girls will fall pregnant. What if you're
faced with pregnancy? What are your options?

  By Daphne Sider  

  Louise grew up living with her mother in a southern suburb of Sydney.
She fell pregnant at the age of 15 and was determined to keep her baby.
Now Ashley is a beautiful and happy three-year-old.
  "When I fell pregnant the first person I told was a good friend of mine
who was much older. She said I could move into her place because I was fighting
with my mother, and we discussed what I was going to do.

  "I was determined to keep my baby because I didn't feel abortion was right
for me. I was really happy about being pregnant. You see, before all this
I was really wild. I was always getting drunk and just out for a good time.
I felt a real fear of responsibility. But after I had Ashley, I realised that
someone else's life depended on me being stable.
  "Also , I wasn't getting on with Mum. I felt she had abandoned me and
I really wanted someone who needed me and loved me.
  "Now I've got to think of things like budgeting and I don't waste money
anymore. I feel heaps more mature than other girls my age, because Ashley
needs me to be.
  "I didn't set out to get pregnant. I didn't use contraceptives because
I never thought it would happen to me. I'd had sexual relationships before
and counted on my luck. Ashley's father and I hung out together for about
two months. He was Indian and never told his family about me because they
would have freaked if they knew he was seeing an Australian girl. He was
15 too. Ashley was conceived the very first time we slept together.
  "I don't see him anymore. It was best that we separated. Maybe when he's
older he'll be able to handle the situation better. I don't feel I need
his money or anything, but maybe Ashley will ask for his support one day.
  "Currently we're living on a Supporting Mother's Pension. It's hard to
exist on a little over a hundred dollars a week, but I'm lucky enough to
have other friends who help me out.
  "I like the thought that when I'm 30 Ashley will be 15. I'll have just
stopped doing the things that she's getting into and so I'll be able to
understand her and I hope she'll never have to lie to me. We'll be friends
leading a similar lifestyle."
  One in 20 teenage girls in Australia became pregnant in 1984. More recent
statistics aren't available yet, but it looks like the trend is continuing.
The majority of girls will opt for abortion, fewer will become single mothers
and fewer still will marry. The numbers that will have their babies adopted
are miniscule. 
  The reasons for this rate of pregnancy among young, unmarried girls are
varied, but naturally enough it begins with the level of sexual activity:
It's increasing, starting at an earlier age for both girls and guys.
  Studies have shown that the earlier you start having sex, the greater
the risk of becoming pregnant soon after. One-fifth of teenage pregnancies
start within a month of first having sex, and half will occur within six
months.
  More reasons why: Although there appears to be an increased knowledge
of contraception, their use is still relatively low. This could be due to
lack of access; unplanned sex; worries that parents might find them; a fear
that using contraception may indicate loose morals; the belief that "it
could never happen to me"; and basically, not considering the consequences
of unprotected sex.
  Also, some girls won't admit to themselves that they are involved in a
sexual relationship. For moral reasons they'd prefer to take a deliberate
risk, rather than a real precaution, as a way of reassuring themselves it's
a one-off situation. Even though it  may very well be a one-off affair,
the risks of pregnancy are too high to ignore. 
  For a teenage girl who feels unloved or unwanted, having a baby may be
seen as the answer. It needs looking after and is wholly dependent and will
provide love and, for some girls, a real purpose for living. Some also view
motherhood as a means of achieving self-worth or independence.
  Sue King, executive officer of Preterm, Sydney, says that alcohol is another
major cause of pregnancy among young girls. When they get drunk they often
forget themselves, and have sex without thinking or without really wanting
to. That's where the problems start.
  With free discussion of sex in magazines, books, films and amongst peers,
coupled with the option of contraceptives and their ready availability,
you may be sceptical about the relatively high incidence of teenage pregnancy.
The problem lies with the confusing attitudes towards the subject. It's
promoted by some, it's rejected by others ... just think of the messages
you're getting from the media, peers and parents.

 SINGLE MOTHERS  

  Like Louise, between 25 and 35 per cent of young, unmarried girls who
fall pregnant will decide to keep their babies. It's a hard decision to
make as it affects the rest of their lives and their relationships with
parents, friends and future loves. It's a decision which also affects their
social and economic prospects.
  Some of the real problems they face may include isolation and lack of
support; inadequate income coupled with fewer employment opportunities;
limited education; poor housing; inadequate medical care both during and
after the pregnancy; and fewer opportunities for free time from being a
parent.
  Louise stressed the value of having friends, particularly those older
and more experienced, who help with the baby's upbringing and with finance.
But not all teenagers are so lucky. Some risk alienation from their families,
boyfriends and friends.
  So what are her other options and how does she decide? Generally it will
depend on her age, her family, personal beliefs and values, her knowledge
and access to prenatal services, the length of the pregnancy before it's
confirmed, whether she sees a child as interrupting her future plans, and
whether she feels motherhood is a natural and inevitable conclusion for
her.
  These days options available to girls faced with an unplanned pregnancy
seem to be changing in emphasis. They will more than likely opt for abortion
or single parenthood rather than adoption or forced marriage.
  
 ABORTION  

  The majority of girls - between 35 and 50 per cent - will choose to end
their pregnancy by abortion. It's an extremely stressful and emotional decision
for any girl to make, but in Jenny's case she felt it was her only option.
  At the age of 18, Jenny suspected she was pregnant. This suspicion was
confirmed for her when she missed her period (which she'd never done before).
Jenny talked it over with her boyfriend. She'd been going out with him for
more than a year and, although there was no reason for it, she felt it was
a way of gaining more of his attention.
  At that time what frustrated Jenny was that she had to wait six weeks
after her missed period to have a pregnancy test done at the Family Planning
Clinic. She knew she'd choose to have an abortion. There was no way she
was about to give up her studies, her career plans, her independence. And
it seemed outrageous to her that her parents and boyfriend should suffer
for it, as she was sure they would.
  The test proved her suspicions. She wanted to cry but couldn't. She felt
sorry for herself, not for what she was going to do. And the same sentiment
carried her through the abortion and the days to follow.
  Jenny's boyfriend, Mark, was with her all the way. He accompanied her
to the clinic and offered moral support. Jenny's not quite sure what his
reaction would have been had she decided to keep the baby, but doesn't think
it's important now anyway.
  Prior to the abortion she was counselled. It was the first time she'd
been counselled about anything and she appreciated it, although she didn't
feel she really needed it. Other girls in the clinic that day were quite
hysterical. Jenny felt cold - a little religious remorse perhaps, but she
put that aside too.  
  It all happened in about ten minutes. That night she went home, cooked 
dinner for herself and her parents, and told them the movie she'd seen that 
day was interesting.
  It was a relief for Jenny that the problem faced by her unplanned pregnancy
was gone, and although sentimental when relating her experiences to me,
there was no remorse at all.
  But the ethical problems of remorse do affect many people. Those who believe
human life begins at the moment of conception will probably be outraged
at Jenny's apparent lack of concern for her child. Their vocal protests
are the reasons why many clinics must lock their doors, which can only open
after you've knocked.
  The physical risks of a young girl giving birth are reason enough for
some to choose abortion. Medical reports suggest that young girls, particularly
those under 16, have a greater chance of giving birth to a premature baby
and developing anaemia or high blood pressure in pregnancy, as well as
suffering many other complications.

 MARRIAGE  

  Marriage is an option, but a limited one. Teenage marriages have a poor
success rate - nearly half break up within five years. Adolescence is probably
the most unstable period of anyone's life; you change your attitudes, you
experiment in all types of ways. It's difficult to imagine that a decision
you make, particularly under duress, will be right for you in years to come.
Still, 15 to 25 per cent of pregnant teenagers will choose to marry by the
time their babies are born.  

 ADOPTION  

  The percentage of girls who put their babies up for adoption is very small
indeed. That's not so surprising, when you consider that they have carried
a child for some nine months.
 
 WHERE TO GO FOR HELP  

  It's been proven that the numbers of pregnant teenagers in countries where
contraception and advice are readily available are considerably lower than
those countries where it's not. Limiting the availability of family planning
courses results only in sex without protection.
  Teenagers are not too immature to use contraceptives effectively. The
problem is ignorance.
  There are many counselling services  you can ring or visit to ask for
pregnancy help or advice. Youthline is one of them; it's a young person's
version of Lifeline. Fifty per cent of all the calls they get deal with
pregnancy. Girls facing the prospect of an unplanned pregnancy, or those
pregnant girls who need information about their health and financial
situations, or who require accommodation, are usually the ones who call.
  The counsellors at Youthline are aged between 18 and 30; they are
welltrained to offer you all the options available but will not give
subjective advice. Youthline is a national counselling service and can be
contacted on the following numbers:

  

