Intellectual failure  

Loss of competence is frequently but incorrectly attributed to getting old.
Very often, what we think to be decline in an old person's mental powers
is the result of emotional problems, such as depression or anxiety, or simply
disuse; young people kept in solitary confinement need retraining to regain
mental competence. Often we overcompensate for old people's mental decline:

  A colleague working at Harvard University began to suspect that, however
  well-meaning, the very act of helping old people may reduce their ability
  to look after themselves. The opportunities for practising a necessary
  skill are removed, and the message that they are becoming incapable of
  self-care, producing a state called `learned helplessness', is subtly 
  conveyed.
    Three groups of old people were given jigsaw puzzles to test their
  performance. An examiner sat in on one group, encouraging , suggesting
  where to put pieces, and actively assisting in finding pieces to fit.
  In another, the examiner gave only minimal assistance and encouragement.
  In the third group there was no examiner, except for assessment before
  and after the experiment.
    The people who were helped performed less well than those who were only
  encouraged, while they did less well than those who were left to themselves.
  The `helped' group completed on the average fewer pieces, and worked more
  slowly.

This suggests that, although helpers mean well, they may be reducing the
competence of older people in their charge. It also shows that being helped
may make a task seem more difficult than it is and so reduce self-confidence.
  This does not mean, of course, that the many frail, aged people who require
assistance for their very survival should have it withdrawn! But we must
judge carefully when to interfere. The old idea that you were always losing
brain cells over the age of sixty seemed bad enough, but now we learn that
the big losses are when we are younger. In fact the present theory is that
we are born with brain cells in excess of normal requirements and are losing
a daily quantity from birth. The greatest loss is around the age of forty
when we begin to notice failing memory. However, from the start we have
learned to do without the ones that become discarded. Mental skills requiring
most flexibility are lost quite early - children and young teenagers take
to computers and solve the Rubik cube better than anyone. But our ability
to make judgments on the basis of information already acquired continues
to develop throughout life.
  We must therefore make certain whether or not an old person's mental
failure is intellectual, and this may require testing by someone specially
trained. We are all familiar with remarkable people who preserve their
mental powers and personality intact into the nineties. We are also painfully
aware that many become depressed and lose their mental acuity. For the majority
there is a falling off in certain mental abilities, particularly those tasks
that require a solution within a given time. There is a slowing of response
due to delay within the central nervous system, and so patience is needed
in communication, and instructions are best given simply and briefly to
allow plenty of time for absorption. Old people find doing two things at
once difficult, so you may see an old lady stop walking while she puts on
her gloves. Then again you may notice old people moving their lips while
reading, and this is because they need to reinforce their understanding
by hearing the words as well as seeing them.
  Of course it is characteristic for the elderly to become less adaptable,
as we already discussed in Chapter 2, and this can make them difficult to live
with. Even more important, perhaps, it may be a serious barrier to successful
rehabilitation after an illness when new skills have to be learned. In this
chapter we describe the different ways your relative's mental processes may
be affected and how you may cope with these problems of the mind.

 Normal changes of aging The emotions  
In old people, emotions assume an increasingly dominant role
and are liable to colour their beliefs about their lifestyle. There may
be a blunting of feeling leading to apathy or indifference, or an accentuation
of former characteristics so that someone, say, who used to be strict and
have demanding standards either mellows into tolerance or hardens into
despotism. It is well known that emotional activity in the elderly tends
towards certain patterns of behaviour - resistance to change, lack of
spontaneity, greater caution and distrust of the unfamiliar.

 Memory  
It is often said that when you are old you can remember the distant
past, but not what has just happened. This distinction, however, is not
by any means clear-cut. We have a short-term memory and a faculty for retaining
information, such as shopping lists, for a short time only, and then discarding
it when it is no longer needed. Certainly when someone's brain starts to
fail, short-term memory is more vulnerable, but this is really because of
an inability to register the information in the first place.
  We all begin to notice that our memory is not so good once we have passed
forty, and this type of forgetfulness is characterized by difficulty in
recalling names and events. Loss of recent memory - or indeed of any period
involving whole episodes, is a different type of failure and should be regarded
as a symptom of disease rather than a feature of aging. This may be due
to a number of conditions, both physical and mental (stroke or alcoholism,
or dementia, see page 94), and including the effect of drugs. So a good medical
opinion based on experienced assessment is needed.

 Memory aids   
There are many practical ways you can suggest to help your 
relative remember necessary facts and domestic details. These will both provide
confidence and can act as a form of memory training:
   1. Keep a large daily diary with space to write all the day's activities,
     hour by hour 2. Use details in the environment - definite times, places, objects -
     to act as reminders to do a particular task. For example, put the coffee
     jar in a prominent place in the kitchen so that preparing a routine
     mid-morning snack is remembered 3. Reduce daily activities to those that are easily remembered by your
     relative 4. Encourage occupations that do not tax the memory too much, for example,
     painting or gardening 5. Praise, even reward good recall, but avoid putting your relative to
     the test.  
Quite often elderly people lose their sense of identity, and need to be
reminded who they are, where they are and what time of day it is. Keeping
clocks and calendars, family pictures and mementos on hand so that your
relative can refer to them constantly helps strengthen self-confidence.
Make sure these aids are large, clearly marked and accurate. Reminiscence
can be used as a pleasurable form of mental stimulation. But when old people
begin to ramble, it is a good idea to change the subject to something more
concrete. Encourage your relative to make choices, and so retain his or
her independence.
  These suggestions are useful for everyone with a degree of memory failure.
They can also be helpful in stimulating elderly people with more severe
mental disability.

 Mental disorder  

The idea of mental failure  I want to say that whereas medical labels are
useful to the profession, I am not speaking only of dementia here. True
dementia is irreversible, but the brain may fail - that is, become confused
- for many other reasons, which are reversible. We have to think of mental 
failure rather in the same way as we do cardiac failure. This means that it 
can be compensated for and kept going with various forms of help, such as I
suggest above. The necessary adjustment can be made by reducing incoming
strains and providing a simple, familiar routine. Perhaps the most important
task for the doctor is to distinguish the elements of dementia and confusion
from treatable depression, and this is not easy.

 Confusion  

Confusion can unfortunately give a false impression of dementia. But it
is simply a descriptive term indicating that someone has a disordered awareness
of his or her surroundings. Of course you can be confused more easily when
you are dementing - but anyone submitted to too many stimuli can be made
confused. Old people who cannot discriminate between sights and sounds
are predisposed, so that confusion is particularly common at dusk, when
it is difficult to pick things out from the background and stereoscopic
(simultaneous) vision is much reduced.                                 
  A state of confusion may be accompanied by delusions. Perhaps you have
felt confused for a moment on waking up in a strange hotel, or when suddenly
questioned while daydreaming? On a lazy holiday you may not be able to say
what day or time of day it is. So remember that anyone can become confused in
situations where too much or too little is happening, the surroundings are
unfamiliar and emotional drives are strong.
  In fact, if your relative is only confused, you can feel optimistic about
the outcome. In many cases confusion can be treated by removing the cause,
which may be one or a combination of the following:
 
 ‚2 A full bladder ‚2 Constipation ‚2 The effect of drugs ‚2 An infection ‚2 Heart disease ‚2 Minor stroke.  

Looking after a confused person requires skilful handling. It is important
not to thwart, but to learn how to guide and soothe your relative. If, for
instance, your old father has got up in the night with the idea of going
to work it is better to say, `Can I come along too?' and lead him into the
kitchen to sit down and wait for the bus, than to get into a noisy
confrontation. After a while he may take a glass of milk or a hot drink
and quietly return to bed, having forgotten where he was going in the first
instance. Let me say at once that this cannot always work, but it is the
approach most likely to succeed.

 Dementia  

Although it is so prevalent in old age - it has been estimated that about
one person in five over the age of eighty suffers from moderate or severe
dementia - it is not easy to detect at first. If you notice that your relative
has serious memory lapses, as I explained on page 92, or starts to behave
in unusual or obsessional ways, or has trouble with language, you should
speak to your doctor about it. Any of these may be due to anxiety or drug
effects, to confusion, or to brain damage, so skilled testing will be needed
to decide what is at the root.

 Coping with dementia   
At least eight in ten elderly people with dementia
are cared for at home and they are also likely to be affected with other
mental and physical illness, imposing a severe strain on the relatives caring
for them. Depending on the degree of dementia, there will be repetition,
restlessness, mistaking people's identity - even yours - lack of motivation,
memory lapses, hitting out at supporters, and disturbances at night. Falls
and incontinence are caused by lack of physical control and the sufferer's
unawareness of his or her own body.
  I think it is true to say that the wish to care for someone with these
problems grows out of an established pattern of life, reinforced by bonds
of affection and obligation. But, of course, the personality change and
the accompanying problems mean you will feel sadness, and at times
exasperation, more acutely. When you care for someone in this condition,
one of the worst features is the inability to sustain a conversation. It
seems as if the person is gradually becoming more and more remote, although
the physical resemblance is there.
  What should you look out for if you suspect your relative has dementia?
The following are typical symptoms; they can be alleviated provided you
are alert to them and take the measures suggested here and by your doctor
or geriatrician: 

  


