How England's other half learns  

JOHN ARROW went back to his old school and the arcane world of Eton College
as 200 new tits (new boys) trooped in for the beginning of term.
Mud, glorious mud; the College (scholarship boys) play the Oppidans
(fee-payers) at the wall game - the ultimate example of sporting violence
and futility. Peculiar to Eton, the wall game requires the ball to be taken
from one end of the wall to the other. Years can pass without a single goal
being scored.

 Eton hides a secret behind the winding streets and elegant facades  

  I WENT BACK to my old house at Eton the other day. And it was full of
girls. In the room where my old mate Faulkner major used to sit surrounded
by cheesy football socks and dirty coffee cups, Joanna Haselden, a stunning
17-year-old blonde from Manchester, was chatting to her friend Alyson from
Solihull. Down the hall the festering aroma of teenage boys had vanished,
to be replaced by wafts of hairspray, soap and scent.
  It was enough to make an Old Etonian traditionalist fear for the future
of his old stamping ground. The opposite sex - whatever next?
  Well, pretty much the same as always, actually. The girls, it transpired,
were pupils of a summer school, run by Eton College during the holidays
to help state school pupils prepare for their Oxford and Cambridge exams.
However, life returned to normal with the beginning of the new academic
year in September and doubtless it will be cheesy-sock time again. 
  For no matter how smart and self-assured the Etonians in these pictures
may appear to be, the truth is that their natural instincts are those of
Adrian Mole. The average Etonian always walks around with his hands in
his pockets, polishes his shoes only when absolutely necessary (ie under
duress from a teacher or older boy), and has about 10 centimetres of ankle
showing below his pinstripe uniform trousers because he's growing like a
weed and his mother has no intention of spending hundreds on a new suit
until the last one has had every possible moment of wear squeezed out of
it.
  The same young sprig of the upper classes lives, like every other boy
in the school, in his own room. It has a fold-down iron bed, a desk, a wardrobe
and an ottoman - the chest into which the average Etonian shoves his football
shorts, jockstraps, dirty magazines and anything else he wants to keep
away from the matron's gaze.
  Any Etonian knows that I have committed several terrible errors in the
preceding two paragraphs, There are no teachers at Eton. They are called
"beaks". Uniform is "school dress," a desk is a "burry" (short for bureau)
and the woman who looks after the welfare of the boys in any one
of the school's 25 houses would be shocked to be called a matron. She is
"dame," as in pantomimes, ugly sisters and the like.
  As you read this there are around 200 13-year-olds who are extremely nervous
about the fact that all these strange words are about to become part of
their vocabulary. They are this term's new boys.
  Once the head boys and cricketing heroes of their prep schools, they must now
adjust to life as the lowest of the low. Within the past decade Eton has
abandoned "fagging" - the system in which junior boys acted as the seniors'
servants - but the gulf between the "new tits" and their elders can still
be intimidatingly wide.
  All the more so when the new arrivals are confronted by their "colours
test," some two weeks after the term - sorry, the "half" (of which, naturally,
there are three in the Etonian year) - begins. The test examines every aspect
of the arcane trivia that the school so adores.
  The terrified new boy must learn all the colours of all the houses and
the 52 various sports teams that the school puts out, all of which dress
entirely differently from any of the others. And they have crazy names,
too. The under-16 cricket team is "Upper Sixpenny." The soccer First XI
is the "Association." Somewhere in the rowing hierarchy, which is based
on eights, there is an immensely important boy called "The Ninth Man In
The Monarch." I have no more idea of what he does now than I did when I took
the colours test some 15 years ago.
  Passing the colours test is like an induction into an adolescent
freemasonry. Once you can identify "The Keeper of the Field", once you can
find your way from "Agar's Plough" to the "Burning Bush", you've become
an insider. You know something the rest of the world does not. You can look
at the busloads of Japanese tourists and visiting journalists and feel the
heady sensation of everyone else's curiosity.
  To the average visiting foreigner, Eton is no more than another example
of the way the British continue to live out their past. The boys all wear
black tailcoats and stiff collars - gee, how quaint. And to the English
Eton means Super-Sloane chinless wonders with braying accents and the old
school ties. It means a place where standards are still maintained, or -
depending on the point of view - a disgusting symbol of an outdated and
oppressive class system.
  But Eton hides a secret behind the winding streets and elegant facades
that make it look more like an ancient university than a school. A closer
look reveals brand-new laboratories; a 400-seat theatre; a new Olympic-standard
gymnasium and swimming-pool; a design and technology centre. These are the
jewels in the crown of a school that is determinedly, even ruthlessly, modern.
  Eton is a business that sells a very expensive product. It costs a basic
£5,835 ($13,570) a year in fees, not including extras, uniforms and
the boys' incidental expenses. An Etonian parent is looking at around
£15,000 of pre-tax income per boy per year at the school.
  Eton is competitive and success brings ample rewards of freedom and
privilege. It is hierarchical; senior boys organise the discipline of the
school by a number of bodies that are self-electing. If you want power for
yourself you have to get on with the people who have it now. This may not
be very nice, but it is realistic.
  This adaptability to the present, rather than any links with the past, makes
Eton what it is and gives its pupils an advantage that some may consider 
unfair. On the other hand, they pay a price that may be more than financial. 
There is very little physical bullying at Eton, but any weakness of personality
is seized upon instantly. Boys learn to cover up, to hide their feelings
or insecurities behind the confident, articulate, often arrogant facade
that characterises the average Etonian.
  Would you want that for your child? When I asked the summer school girls
for their opinions of Eton, their feelings were mixed. Compared to regular
state schools the facilities were staggering. And they were struck by the
degree to which teachers expected them to take the initiative in class and
informal tutorial sessions.
  But there were drawbacks. Everyone agreed that the food could be truly
awful. Tales abounded of mouldy sausage rolls and over-ripe grapefruit.
Alyson Guiel looked around her small whitewashed room, covered in posters,
snapshots and mouldy bits of Blu-Tack left here by its usual male occupant
and said: "I had imagined huge, wood-panelled rooms, but each of the boys
pays £6,000 a year and gets a room half the size of the one I have
at home."
  They had not met any of the boys, who had long since left for their summer
holidays. But they wondered how 17- and 18-year-olds could stand the rules
and restrictions of boarding-school life. They didn't think that it was
a good idea for them to be shut away from real people. And, as Joanna Haseldon
added: "There should be girls here. The boys must be sex-starved."
  Now there she may well be right. And it is probably also true that the
presence of girls at Eton would make the boys pleasanter, cleaner, more
considerate and much more understanding of the opposite sex. What it would
do to the girls, however, doesn't bear thinking about.

 ETONIANS  

THERE are about 1,250 boys at Eton. Each boy's parents pay £1,945
a term in fees, plus extras. Each boy must have at least two schoolsuits,
consisting of pinstripe trousers, tail coat and waistcoat, at around
£150 each. He will also need hundreds of pounds' worth of shirts,
ties, games clothes, casual clothes, towels, curtains and so on.
  There have been 20 Etonian prime ministers, including Wellington, Gladstone
and Macmillan. Current Etonian politicians include Cabinet members Lord
Hailsham, Nicholas Ridley and Paul Channon; Tory "Wets" Francis Pym, Ian
Gilmour and Lord Carrington and Labour MP Tam Dalyell.
  Etonian writers include the poets Shelley, Gray and Swinburne. In the
20th century 1984, Brave New World and James Bond are all creations of Etonian
authors in George Orwell, Aldous Huxley and Ian Fleming (Bond himself
was not an Etonian). Novelist Anthony Powell, art historian Harold Acton,
critic Cyril Connolly, economist J M Keynes and philosopher A J Ayer all
attended the school.
  The Old Etonians won the FA Cup in 1879 and 1882 and were runners-up four
times. In 1967 the Eton rowing eight were the world junior champions, beating
the Russian and East German national teams.

