Flower children's autumn By Phil Jarratt  

  IF YOU'RE a baby boomer with a long memory, you may recall Haight-Ashbury,
Dr Timothy Leary, Indian headbands, fringed frontier jackets and The Summer
of Love. It is almost 20 years since Sergeant Pepper told the band to play
- beginning a bizarre cultural revolution of sorts that had a profound effect
on the way we looked at drugs, the environment, even the war in Vietnam.
  The hippie movement had many homes, from Amsterdam to Istanbul, from
Greenwich Village to Glebe. but nowhere was the beads and bangles brigade
so evident, so pervasive, as in San Francisco.
  "If you're going to San Francisco, be sure to wear some flowers in your
hair," went the song. And they did, filling the seedy streets of the Haight
with the spirit of free love and cheap thrills. But San Francisco got sick
of the hippies even before the rest of the world did and so they moved on,
generally finding rural retreats where their unorthodox behaviour was rendered
acceptable by sheer force of numbers.
  In the way of human evolution, hippies became New Settlers who became
disaffected subsistence farmers who drifted back into the cities and became
fully-fledged yuppies. Except in northern California, where the spirit of
Jefferson Airplane lived on long after the band had become a Starship and
succumbed to commercial temptation. And in one northern Californian town the 
spirit lives on, albeit a little wheezily, today.
  In 1971, two oil tankers collided off Bolinas - an hour north of San
Francisco, in ritzy Marin County - leaving the area's beautiful beaches
fouled with slick. Environmentally concerned young people from the Haight,
the houseboats of Sausalito and the Berkeley university campus descended
on the tiny village to help clean up. Many of them decided to stay and the
hippies controlled the town of 1,500 people by the mid-1970s through stacking
the boards of such instrumentalities as the Bolinas Community Public Utilities.
This board managed to halt any new housing construction by barring the
distribution of water meters.
  But even more noticeable than the anti-building stance was the new attitude
to tourism.
  The picturesque, if slightly shabby, village had been a tea-and-scones
stop on the way to Point Reyes National Seashore Park but the flower children
ripped the sign down.
  Even though the California Transport Department has erected 34 replacement 
signs, the road to Bolinas remains unmarked.
  When I first visited Bolinas, a decade ago, I was immediately seduced
by the potent mixture of liberal thought and creativity.

