Putting dollars into housing Tony Dalton looks at alternative finance for public housing  

  ADVOCATES OF AN EXPANDED and high quality public housing system have been
experiencing a finance crisis for some time. More recently the number of
people having problems with housing finance has grown: many prospective
owner-occupiers have not been able to get the finance they need at a price
they can afford. But instead of working towards fundamental changes in housing
finance, which could go some way towards ensuring a steadier supply of finance
to both owner-occupied and a public housing, the government has again reacted
with increased subsidies to home buyers.
  The prospects for public housing sector are not good. The Minister for
Housing and Construction continues to fight for federal budget funds for
public housing, but now he openly states that future increases will be modest.
Certainly the ALP's policy commitment to double in ten years public housing's
share of the total housing stock will not be met. There is also the possibility
that the amount that the state governments will allocate from their low
interest rate Loan Council borrowings to housing will be limited in the
future. Finally it is not generally appreciated that the increasing rebate bill
faced by the state housing authorities will have an increasingly profound
effect on the amount available for additional public housing. Something
like $250 million of untied grant money now goes in de facto social security
payments to low income public tenants unable to meet the cost rent.
  The prospects of owner ocupied housing are also not good. There are
indications of a very considerable down turn in the production of new dwellings
over the next few years. In 1984-85 the total number of dwellings completed
was 152,700; it is expected that this level of activity will decrease approximately ten per cent per year over the next two years. By 1986-87
the number of completions will be about 125,000. This will be well below
the demand for new housing forecast by bodies such as the Indicative Planning
Council for the Housing Industry.
  The reason for this downturn in the private sector is the reduced
availability of finance, a result of market interest rates increasing to
very high levels. With the savings banks and the building societies still
regulated to charge a lower than market interest rate on housing loans,
they have had trouble attracting deposits, causing a diminishing supply
of funds being available for lending.
  Unlike the shortage of funds for public housing, this situation is creating
a sharp response in a number of quarters. The odds are that this will produce
some form of action at Federal government level and perhaps in the finance
sector. As it now stands banks, building societies, housing industry employer
bodies and trade unions have been making submissions to government, and
it is rumoured that a number of cabinet submissions have sought to identify
options for increasing the level of finance available for housing loans.
  It is difficult to predict the outcome of this process. It is likely that
the interest rate ceiling will stay for the present because of the political
dangers of increasing the cost of funds for existing owner-occupiers. Every
effort will be made not to increase the level of the first home owners'
scheme because of the government's determination to restrict expenditure.
A likely interim step will be to secure more funds for housing loans through
overseas borrowing by the banks supported by the government.
  Whatever happens it is almost certain that the changes will be interim
ones. Eventually the Federal government will deregulate housing finance,
removing the ceiling on rates. This is likely to be done when interest
rates come down to somewhere near the present ceiling. The only question
that remains is that of accompanying measures. The government will have
to ensure, if it is to be re-elected, that levels of investment in housing
are maintained. This will undoubtedly be done in consultation with the
private building industry. Advocates of public housing must ensure that
they are a part of this process of consultation. It is just possible that
in the design of these measures the non-profit housing can get one or a
number of its proposals up. 
  IN OPPOSITION THE LABOR PARTY SAW the long term solution to housing finance
fluctuations as extension of regulation. It planned to require all financial
institutions to contribute to a National Housing Fund, in effect, an extension
of asset controls over the non-bank finance sector. Not surprisingly this
proposal was opposed by the deregulatory Martin Committee, and won little
support in the Hawke Labor government.
  A second proposal that may have a greater chance of success in the continuing
deregulatory climate is the introduction of capital indexed bonds. They
are a variation on the more traditional bond issues which are already a
feature of government borrowing programs. Capital indexed bonds are more
suitable to a period of inflation and uncertainty: lenders who buy the bonds
are guaranteed a return of, say, two or three per cent over the inflation
rate; because there is certainty over the long term rate of return, investors
do not seek the higher interest rates that may be available in other parts
of the market. Ultimately the borrower pays a lower real rate of interest on
the loan.
  Housing bonds represent a possible mechanism for investment in housing
in both the private and non-profit housing sectors. Indeed, the Victorian
government has already made an issue of housing bonds. It has used the finance
raised in this way for `on-lending' to owner-occupiers under a Ministry
of Housing home purchase assistance program.
  At this stage capital indexed bonds have not been used to finance non-profit
housing. However, it remains as a possible mechanism which, if developed
and refined, could sustain flows of finance into the non-profit sector.
These flows could also come much nearer to satisfying the demand for capital
than is presently the case with the budget allocations of the Federal and
State governments under the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement.
  If this method of financing the public sector was adopted there would
need to be changes in the way public housing is subsidised through a reduced
interest rate and an annual grant. The grant is a relatively recent
development. This subsidy then gets passed on to tenants as lower rents
through a system of rebates.
  A better approach is to move towards a situation where the full interest
rate is built into the costing of public housing, in order that public housing
operates in the same financial condition as the private sector, and does
not perform the income security role of the Department of Social Security.
Accompanying this move there would then have to be changes to the income
maintenance system. Preferably this change to income maintenance would result
in the income levels of all statutory income beneficiaries being raised
in a way that recognises the contribution that housing costs make to poverty.
However, a more limited program and perhaps more feasible in the present
economic context would be to have the social security system meet the rent
rebate bill incurred by state housing authorities and the other providers
of public housing.
 
  THE OPPORTUNITY FOR considering these issues on a regular basis is now
provided for in the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement. As renegotiated
in 1984 it states that "the operation of the Agreement is to be evaluated
trienially". It would not be stretching this provision too far to advance
the argument that the financial provisions of the agreement are inadequate.
The triennial evaluation should consider how the financial provisions could
be improved. In particular there should be investigation and development
of the use of capital indexed bonds for investment in both the public sector
and owner-occupied housing.
  In the current context investment in housing is falling sharply. Arrangements
established in the 1920s and 1940s are not appropriate to a deregulated finance
market and high interest rates. An initiative is required which will facilitate
continued investment in housing in a way that ensures better access to housing
finance across a range of income groups.

Tony Dalton is chairperson of National Shelter and lecturer in social policy
at the Phillip Institute of Technology.

