<subsample>
	<id> F12b </id>
	


	<source> Australian Society - May 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Mixed messages on migration </h>
	


	<misc> Two recent government decisions raise questions about Australia's policy </misc>
	


	<h> A migration smokescreen  </h>
	


	<bl> Renata Singer </bl>
	

  THERE ARE SO MANY LARGE AND difficult issues facing this country at the
present time, it is puzzling that the Federal government is investing time
and funds in running a campaign on the relatively insignificant problem
of illegal immigration. For a campaign is certainly being waged. A ministerial
statement on illegal immigrants in October 1985 announced, unheralded and
undebated, tough new measures against those not legally in Australia.  
  Readers of newspaper reports on this issue in recent months might imagine
that Australia has a serious problem. The Department of Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs (DIEA) quotes a figure of 50,000 people living in Australia
without legal authority.
  Where does the figure come from? The department itself concedes that it
is an estimate, not calculated on the basis of numbers of arrivals and
departures, visas issued or other substantive data.
  Roughly the same figure has been used in the past whenever the department
has focussed on the issue of illegal migration. Before the amnesty of 1977
the claim was that at least 40,000*40,00 people were in Australia illegally. But
only 7207 came forward and applied for amnesty. At the time the Regularisation
of Status Program in 1980, it was claimed there were 60,000-70,000 illegals.
When the amnesty ended in December of that year, about 11,000 applications
had been made representing approximately 14,000 people. In 1982 the department
announced a `crackdown' on illegal immigrants, and this time it claimed
100,000 as the likely figure. Since then, without any campaign, 50,000 illegal
immigrants must have disappeared of their own accord!
  Who then are the prohibited non-citizens? No one can say with any certainty
who they are, or why they came and stayed in Australia, but some data is
available for those who apply for, and are granted, change of status to
become permanent residents. Prior to October 1985 anyone could apply to
change their status who had strong and compassionate grounds, whether they
had current `legal' status or not. Since October 1985, only those who are
considered `legal' in Australia can apply, no matter how strong, humane
or compassionate their case might be.
  In 1984-85 9898 people applied to change their status. Of the 6014 granted
residence status, 69 per cent of approvals were for spouses, children and
aged parents of Australian residents and citizens. They were eligible to
stay under the family reunion aspect of our immigration program. In many
cases they tired of waiting for the departmental process, which can take
years. In some cases a disaster had occurred which made it imperative for
them to leave immediately, or they were given incorrect advice by friends,
relatives or immigration officials.
  MRS Z IS JUST SUCH A CASE. Born in Spain in 1925, she married at 18, and
conceived 18 children of whom eight survived. Five of these children,
themselves married, are now resident in Australia, the first having migrated
twenty years ago. Mrs Z's husband died in 1965.
  Of her three daughters married and living in Spain two live far away from
the city where she had lived her whole life, and the third could not
accommodate her mother in already cramped housing.
  The well-established and flourishing part of the family applied under
family reunion for their mother to join them in Australia. After the usual
delays of many months, permission was refused because Mrs Z was deemed by
the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs not to be a 'dependent parent'
as she was not yet 60 and had other children living in Spain who could support
her.
  In 1985 the daughter who lived near Mrs Z, and to whom she was most attached
and dependent on, received permission to migrate to Australia and Mrs Z
came with her.


</subsample>
