<subsample>
	<id> F15a </id>
	


	<source> The Bulletin - 25 April 1986 </source>
	
  

	<h> Gentlemen versus players in union struggle </h>
	


	<bl> By Tony Abbott </bl>
	

TEACHER unionism in private schools is celebrating its coming of age with
an old-style bunfight between different factions of the New South Wales
Independent Teachers' Association.(ITA).
  Elections last November produced a lurch to the left and the narrow defeat
of president Peter Ofner. Now Ofner and his supporters are seeking to overturn
the result, claiming that ITA officials used union resources to sway the
poll.
  Shenanigans of this sort are as old as unionism, but this is the first
time the sordid reality of power politics has penetrated the politically
virgin ITA. Unionism came late to private school teachers, whose dedication
long resembled that of the religious brothers and nuns whose places they
largely filled. However, in the past 10 years union membership has increased
from around 10 percent to nearly 80 percent of New South Wales' private
school teachers. Increased militancy, at least among union officials, has
wrung greatly improved conditions from school authorities.
  At the same time, the union's growing power and influence has attracted
the sort of ambitious activist who has long flourished in the state school
teacher unions. Ofner predicts that serious industrial relations problems
will pose a threat to the future of private schools.
  Ofner's involvement with the ITA began in 1977 when it was a fledgling
lobby more concerned with getting organised than pressurising schools.
Ofner blames the constitution for many of his problems.
  The then general-secretary*general-secratary, Zyg Gardon, wanted to avoid
the factionalism and political in-fighting which, he believed, marred most
unions. Consequently, under the ITA constitution, candidates for election
to the union executive had first to be approved by local branches. Gardon
said the aim was to keep out cranks and zealots.
  Instead, it has meant that the union establishment is almost impossible
to challenge because many of the branches are under the influence of the
establishment. Moreover, because the elected representatives are full-time
teachers and only part-time union officials, the union has come to be
dominated by slicker and more professional full-time officials who are
appointed by the executive rather than elected by members.
  It is a quirk of Australian industrial law that state-registered trade
unions, such as the ITA, are able to concentrate power in officials who
never have to face a membership ballot.
  Ofner says that his uneasiness with policy developments crystallised after
general-secretary Michael Raper and two other full-time officials saw him
late in 1984 to warn him about views he was expressing to other executive
members. 
  He says that he then became conscious that Raper's full-time position
and access to information gave him the upper hand in dealings with elected
but part-time officials.
  Simmering conflict between the amateurs and professionals burst into the
open at a council meeting last June when Ofner alleged that Raper had aligned
the union with the left-wing steering committee of the New South Wales ALP.
  At the August council meeting notice was given of a no-confidence motion
to be moved against Ofner. At the September meeting, Ofner, as president,
ruled the motion out of order on the basis of a legal opinion which he read
to the council. However, the council overruled him and dismissed him.
  Ofner saw his sacking as evidence of the left's ability to manipulate
the union structure. He successfully appealed to the New South Wales
Industrial Commission for reinstatement on the ground that he had been
denied natural justice.
  But this was not before Raper had written to all members, saying that
Ofner had been sacked for making serious allegations against the union which
he could not substantiate. It was this letter which Ofner claims unfairly
influenced the result of last November's poll. In the meantime, progressive
candidates were claiming that Ofner's campaign was backed by the National
Civic Council, a conservative union lobby. Ofner says that his claim is
absurd, since he had been heavily criticised by the NCC in 1984, but that
the charge damaged his credibility as a politically non-aligned candidate.
  So far, Ofner's attempts to have the result overturned have been bogged
down in argument over the Industrial Commission's jurisdiction. Another
option open to him is a claim in the Supreme Court that the election involved
a breach of the common law rule that union resources should not be used
in election campaigns.
  But Ofner's room for legal manoeuvre is limited by the expense of
litigation. A spokesman for the ITA, which has already spent more than
$29,000 on legal fees, said he hoped that Ofner and his friends &quot;haven't
had to put second mortgages on their homes in this climate of high interest
rates&quot;.
  Ofner is aware of the risks he is running but says he considers that
the battle for justice in the union and for the preservation of viable private
schools is worth the sacrifice.


</subsample>
