Australlian outdoor education course A unique survey of leadership and instruction qualifications, by Sandra Bardwell  

‚2 AN IMPORTANT FEATURE OF THE RAPID growth of the Australian recreation
and leisure industry during recent years has been the proliferation of related
courses at universities and colleges. These are intended to equip students
to gain employment in the industry by qualifying them, among other things,
to lead and/or instruct groups in outdoor recreation activities.
  There is no single source of information about courses likely to interest
Wild readers - those with practical rather than theoretical orientation,
for doers rather than planners. This survey aims to fill the gap. It also
draws attention to the sometimes vexed question of the value of
certification, such as provided by the Bushwalking and Mountaincraft
Leadership courses. As their content shows, such certificates signify that
skills have been tested fairly thoroughly, and that awareness of the potential
hazards and problems (especially those to do with human relations) has been
instilled. Participants are left in no doubt that there is more to leading
a trip into the wild than just bashing about in the bush and trusting that
everything will be all right.
  This national survey covers full-time courses at tertiary institutions
and shorter, non-institutional, non-profit-making courses, in which training
in outdoor recreation activities, and in the skills of leadership and/or
instruction, is offered as the major component of the course. The activities
concerned are bushwalking, ski touring and canoeing; no such courses in
caving and rockclimbing have been discovered, although both activities might
be covered in one of the tertiary courses listed. Students in these courses
are required, to varying degrees, to do these activities and to acquire
a reasonable level of skill, as well as to study theoretical subjects.
  Thus the survey does not cover the many courses which, by their titles,
may seem to meet these criteria. These include leisure studies, recreation
courses focusing on sport or activities such as dancing and drama, studies
in recreation planning and programming, and park management, and natural
resources or `facility' management.
  In Victoria, at least, some technical schools offer outdoor recreation
subjects at HSC level - no attempt has been made to identify them in this
survey. It is worth noting here that the Outdoor Guides Course at Katoomba
Technical College, mentioned in Wild Information, no 20, will be offered
as a part-time course in 1987; inquiries should be directed to the Course
Coordinator, Jim Smith, Katoomba Technical College, Parke Street, Katoomba,
NSW 2780; telephone (047) 82 1099.
  All the information in this survey is derived from the literature published
by the institutions and organizations concerned, and from further inquiries
- very few, if any, of the brochures contain all the information an intending
student may need to know. Many of them are overloaded with almost meaningless
waffle about the courses - skill in reading between the lines is handy.
  No specific dates have been given for terms or semesters for the tertiary
courses. Most of the institutions covered operate two semesters during the
year, the first beginning late in February or early in March.
  The crucial dates are those on which applications for enrolment close.
For tertiary institutions, applications for acceptance into a course are
made through a separate State authority - a Universities Admissions Centre,
or equivalent. The university or college subsequently handles enrolments.
  No information about the costs of the tertiary courses has been given.
Normal union (or equivalent) fees are generally levied; wide variations
in the requirements for books and equipment make any attempt to estimate
costs meaningless.
  Because of the practical nature of the courses concerned, they are generally
not available to external students. People wishing to apply for acceptance
into a course conducted in a State different from that in which they completed
secondary education should check acceptance of their qualifications before
lodging a formal application.
  Status is an elusive but important factor. The Australian Council on Tertiary
Awards (an official body) administers, by independent panels, the accreditation
of all courses in advanced education in Australia, a procedure which takes
place, for each course, every five years. Accreditation is on an academic
basis, but appropriateness or demand is taken into account. The procedure
is also designed to ensure reasonable consistency between the courses offered
in each State. Federal Government funding is only given to accredited courses.
Thus it is unlikely that a course will be offered which will not be accredited.
  Apart from this, an assessment can be made by finding out whether a course
is a prerequisite for or part of teacher or other professional training,
and by the number of years it has been in existence. Almost any training
at a reputable institution will enhance, but not guarantee, chances of gaining
employment in a chosen field. Ultimately, however, the value or success of
a course depends on the quality and ability of individual graduates.
  Similarly, short courses may be judged by the number of years they have
been in existence - they would not have continued if demand was not sustained.
It is also worth checking whether a course is required or preferred by
government agencies for undertaking specific activities, especially with
school groups.
  For short courses, do not neglect finding out whether you need to arrange
insurance or whether you will be covered while on the course, and if so,
to what extent. This vital subject is not mentioned in much detail in the
available literature.
  It is noteworthy that canoeing, in particular, is highly organized and
standardized, and that there is strong emphasis on acquisition of skills
and on leadership training in bushwalking, a trend gathering momentum for
ski touring. Such formal training and organization for rockclimbing is
apparently absent. Although leadership skills are less relevant to this
activity, technical skills and measures of ability, especially in teaching,
are important. Thus, Mountaincraft Pty Ltd believes that a `most
unsatisfactory' situation exists concerning climbing instructors. One
`accreditation' system is based on the fairly low level of climbing ability
of the person who runs it. Mountaincraft is trying to devise a standard
for instruction, but believes that `maturity and instructional ability are
more important than climbing skill' - which applies equally to instruction
in the other rucksack sports. Among the courses offered by Mountaincraft
are Abseil Instructors (five days, technical and climbing skills, written
and practical examinations) and Advanced Rockclimbing (full week, `to achieve
an instructor level for which there is no agreed civil standards in this
country'). Address: PO Box 582, Camberwell, Victoria 3124; telephone (03)
817 4802.
  Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, two questions should be answered:
`What type of career do you want to follow?', and `Which course will best
lead you towards this?'-
 
 Further reading  

  

‚2 MITTAGUNDI, ABORIGINAL FOR `campsite next to the Mitta', is located near
the old gold-mining township of Glen Valley, on the upper Mitta Mitta River,
in north-east Victoria. Lying just east of the Bogong High Plains, and
surrounded by the mountains of the Great Dividing Range, it is a remote
and beautiful place.
  The camp, on a 200 hectare property, is simple and old-fashioned, designed
to be built, maintained and operated by the young people who come to it.
It is a place where people matter, where co-operation is stressed, and
competition played down. It represents the realization of a dream for its
founder, Ian Stapleton.
  Ian worked with Outward Bound before spending seven years as the Director
of Outdoor Education at Timbertop, the `bush arm' of one of Australia's
most prestigious schools, Geelong Grammar.
  It was during this time that Ian came to believe that all young people
should have the opportunity to experience our mountain country, its challenges
and rewards, not just those lucky enough to go to schools that could provide
such opportunities.
  He had always been a great believer of the levelling quality of the bush
- the way it can bring together all sorts of people from all walks of life 
and situations, on an equal footing, and demand co-operation from everyone.
  Initially, Mittagundi operated from temporary bases. Because of the many
problems, mostly financial, it frequently looked like it would founder before
it was properly started. However, it is now firmly established on a permanent
site and is able to run nine-day courses all year round.
  The camp is spacious, and set in a clearing of about two hectares. Old
renovated Melbourne Tramways buses are used for bunk-rooms, stores and an
office. Gradually these are being replaced by permanent mud-brick and timber
buildings built by the people on courses, using local materials and traditional
methods.
  The buses, although somewhat out of place in such surroundings, played
an essential part in the establishment of Mittagundi. In order to get the
camp started, and as cheaply as possible, Ian bought a fleet of old buses
from the Tramways Board. The one catch was that he had to remove the engines
and transmissions from them, so that he could afford what was left. With
a wry smile he admits that was a mistake. It would have been much easier
if he had left the engines alone. Ian laughs now when he tells the story
of how it took him 18 months to tow all the buses to Omeo with his old worn-out
Land Rover. It involved him in countless `unfortunate incidents', took over
40 Land Rover clutches, and brought him into conflict with seemingly every
government department!
  The camp now boasts several permanent buildings - store-rooms, stable
with fenced yard, equipment shed, even a `bush shower'. (Let your imagination
run wild here!) The building programme is now centred on a new kitchen/dining
room. The ground has been levelled, the stump holes dug, and the enthusiasm
for the project rising. Partially funded by a grant from the Menzies
Foundation, the new building will have a huge stone fireplace - to be built by
a stonemason - timber floor, and various other luxuries. The temporary
kitchen/dining room, which is open-sided, with a dirt floor and a leaky
roof, will then be demolished, although not without some regrets, I suspect.
  Wood-fired boilers, of considerable age, provide hot water, massive old
wood stoves are used for cooking, and lighting is by gas and kerosene. Needless
to say, collecting and cutting wood is an important part of everyday life
at Mittagundi.
  All the courses at Mittagundi take roughly the same form, varying slightly
according to the season, weather and people attending. The maximum age for
participants is 18, and the courses are not co-educational.
  Each group, of about 20 people, hike into Mittagundi over two days. Watches,
radios and money are not allowed into Mittagundi, and are left in a safety
deposit box before the start of the hike. The route, over the Bogong High
Plains, is an old miners' bridle-track. Unused for almost 50 years, it has
been one of Mittagundi's achievements to clear it. The group carries some
gear in rucksacks, and two pack horses carry the heavy stuff. Bloggs and
Kate, the half-draught horses, know the track and are used to being led
by different people. They help to set the scene of what to expect at
Mittagundi. This method of reaching Mittagundi provides a way of combining
hiking, highlighting the remoteness of Mittagundi, and saving enormously
on transport costs. After two days on the track the basic facilities at
Mittagundi seem quite luxurious!
  The group spends four days at Mittagundi itself. Divided into two, each
half runs the base for two days. This means being heavily involved in the
building, running and maintenance of the old-style farm and village. The
other two days are spent on activities such as rafting, ski touring, climbing
and abseiling.
  The trip out takes a day longer than the trip in, partly because of the
1,000 metre climb out of the valley, but also because time is taken to
climb a few peaks of the Bogong High Plains.
  Ian Stapleton firmly believes in having the right `mix' of people at
Mittagundi. He says that is essential for the achievement of its aims, and
is the basis of his philosophy in setting up such a camp. 

