<sample>
	<id> F19 </id>
	


	<source/>
	


	<note> 2006 </note>
	


	<h> Succession: handing over the reins of power </h>
	


	<misc> Transferring control of a family business can be fraught with problems,
especially if there is a clash of personalities. Mike Dobbie investigates
the best ways to handle a difficult time </misc>
	

  Nothing fails like succession when it comes to handing down the family
business. The problems of transferring control are sometimes so great that
the business goes to the pack while the family feuds.
  Comments Ron Flavel, of the Small Business Corporation of South Australia
(probably joking): &quot;Some children use the banana-skin approach - lay a banana
skin at the top of the stairs and call dad over for a chat. The problem
ends up flat on his back.&quot; But advisers stress the need to seek the advice
of experts. Says one Sydney consultant: &quot;The tragedy of family in-fighting
can be prevented if people get help. Otherwise, everyone loses out and
the taxman is the only real winner.&quot;
  How should the family business be passed on? What conflicts arise between
parents and their heirs when family succession becomes an issue? Hugh Reid,
of accountants Touche Ross, says small clients often sell the business if
no suitable family member can be found to take over or, when the father
reaches retirement, he looks, for personal reasons, for an outsider in
preference to his children. Reid says a frequent cause of conflict is when
the father does not want to let go his hold on the firm but the son wishes
to introduce new ideas.
   Another problem is the age-old story of the &quot;three-ring circus&quot;, where
the first generation makes the business, the second builds it and the third
wrecks it. Says Keith James, another Touche Ross partner, &quot;If the son has
been involved in dad's business for some time, the son is more inclined
to continue to build the business up and maintain a high standard. But the
danger lies in the grandson who has not seen the struggle to establish the
firm. He sees the business as a casual thing and a source of steady income
from little effort. With such a lack of commitment, the grandson erodes
all the effort of his father and grandad.&quot;
  Even where a family is sensible about the business, problems keep arising.
Wills are becoming more complex as families battle with the capital gains
tax, which seems to be all-encompassing in terms of estate assets. &quot;We can't
warn people enough just how careful they must be,&quot; says a Sydney consultant.
&quot;The tax gives no quarter.&quot; His opinion is shared by many other business
advisers. But Gary Higgins, a partner with Arthur Young accountants, says: 
&quot;Owning your business through a family trust can still have capital gains
tax advantages by deferring any tax liability until the business is sold
outside the family.&quot;
  Another problem in family successions is the control-from-the-grave factor.
This arises when a will is finely detailed, covering every imprudency an
heir is presumed capable of. Lawyer Norm O'Bryan, of Melbourne solicitors
Gillotts, agrees that the best method to pass on an estate quickly to the
various members of a family is through shares in a company or through a
unit trust. O'Bryan says: &quot;If the parent is a sole trader or in a partnership
it is more difficult to pass down the assets. For certainty of devolution
on death, you need a trust that cannot be inhibited by the people who will
not inherit the assets. It must be transferred readily and that is easiest
with shares or units.&quot; 
  O'Bryan warns that discretionary trusts permit the distribution of ownership
to be determined by someone else against the original intention of the
testator, &quot;A unit trust is fixed - you know precisely who gets what; it
is the same with shares because the proportion of ownership remains the
same. But  with a discretionary trust the trustee acts as legal owner and
he can determine the control of the income stream to the children independent
of the original owner's wishes. He may decide John should get all of the
estate despite the fact that John's dad hoped it would be shared between John 
and his sister. It may be that with shares or a unit trust one or more children
may decide to sell but the decision is theirs, not someone else's.&quot;
  But capital gains tax will always cause problems and O'Bryan recommends
that people should seek advice. &quot;Unit trusts are in a sense companies and
under the new legislation they have lost their tax minimisation advantages,&quot;
he says. &quot;People should plan carefully before they decide in what fashion they
will pass on the family firm inheritance.&quot;
  How can the family business be structured to ease tensions caused by
transition from parent to progeny? It is a time fraught with danger, say
the specialists. Jealousies can arise when the boss's son moves up the ladder
ahead of employees competing for the top job.
  Says Albert Nelson, general manager of the Small Business Development
Corporation: &quot;The situation is delicate. Senior people need to be brought
into the picture. A personnel-management exercise is required to involve
top-level employees in the process of transition. You can't just solve it
by offering more money. For these people, their job is their lifestyle as
well as their source of income. If you actively include staff in the changes
and keep them in the picture, then everything should work out.&quot;
  Higgins warns that the fur can fly and the morale of employees can be
crippled by nepotism. Staff see the boss's son or daughter as competition
and lose interest if their prospects are threatened. He says it is essential
to keep staff happy by ensuring they can see a career path ahead of them.
Squabbles within families can also spill over into a company and it may
be necessary  to recruit a professional manager to keep relatives at a
distance. 
  Flavel knows of a managing director who felt his family was getting too
much of a say. &quot;It was all getting a bit incestuous,&quot; says Flavel. &quot;So he
brought in two outside professionals. One was an accountant and the other
a legal expert. With the injection of new blood and fresh ideas the business
got a view of the real world. They helped to pull the company back into
a business orientation.&quot;
  Higgins says: &quot;A buffer zone is needed, particularly in battles among
the children themselves; someone to stand in the middle and keep the company
on track.&quot;
  Higgins warns that old people often take too narrow an outlook towards
a firm and this can be a formula for disaster. &quot;In a changing climate with
new legislation the heirs are more in touch with commercial reality,&quot; he
says. &quot;We advise that it is best to find a middle line if the father won't
budge.&quot;
  There are other ways. Says Flavel: &quot;If the son has to play tough, there are
two options open to him. If he is a director and his father is also on the
board, the son can invoke section 320 of the Companies' Code, which gives
a minority shareholder the right to take part in the decision-making. This
forces the father into acknowledging the son's position.&quot;
  Flavel cites one case where the antagonism was resolved in another way:
&quot;There was a business where the son, who was in his fifties and was managing
director, found that his 80-year-old father was still countermanding his
decisions. One day the son got so fed up with the old man's interference
that he sold the company. From that day on the son has not spoken to his
father, who is now 84.&quot;
  Steven Kunstler, a senior associate with solicitors Corrs Pavey Whiting
and Byrne, says that smoothe continuity in the family business is more
difficult if children have been kept in a subordinate role by a forceful
father. Kunstler says: &quot;The mistake lies in not involving the children in
the management structure. The two most popular ways of introducing siblings
to the business are through shareholdings or giving the son managerial
responsibility, by possibly heading a division within the firm, to prove
himself.&quot; For example, he says, in a building construction firm, the father
can place his sons in control of supply procurement, the construction of
a development itself or the fitting-out.
  Kunstler warns that if families have reached the stage of using section
320 the situation is breaking down. &quot;We're talking about personalities here
and the different business factors make every case different,&quot; he says.
&quot;You can't give blanket advice because the factors vary. We find that nine
out of ten cases are resolved before they get too serious. People apply common
sense and know where the best interests of the family lie.&quot;
  Generally, European and Asian families are more successful than Australian
families at maintaining family businesses for generations. They are more
closely bonded and to them the business and family are one. &quot;The close ties
they have allow them to co-operate,&quot; says Warren Porter, a partner in the
small business section of Deloitte Haskins and Sells in Sydney. &quot;Traditionally,
the father is the head of the household and he dictates what the children
do. You find that if a member of the family gets into trouble, everyone
pitches in to help. Australian families are less inclined to help each other
in times of strife. We tend to look after number one. The close bond that
ethnic families have contribute to the success they enjoy during the transition
from father to children.&quot;
  Albert Nelson, of the Small Business Development Corporation, says there
are generally three scenarios for family succession, each with a difficult 
transition phase. The most obvious is when the heir has been working in the 
firm for some years. Nelson says: &quot;The important thing is for there to be an 
exchange of views so that mutual goals can be realised. We advise that the 
parties involved first describe the company as they see it and what they want 
for it in the future. You will often find the son has a different picture from 
his father. These views need to be analysed and eventually, a common plan agreed
upon.&quot;
  A frank exchange of views is also essential if the son comes from the
academic world. &quot;There is a danger with the son wanting to implement all
the new ideas he has learned,&quot; says Nelson. &quot;The transition period must
be treated carefully as an on-going phase to introduce the two parties to
each other in terms of what they want for the firm. The idea of new technology
can be used as a threatening device. The father often cannot accept the
need in the business he established for the fast processing of material.
He is unable to make hard decisions aided by the hi-tech of the modern
business. He is scared and uncertain. The youngster feels confined by his
father's thinking. He sees the old guard as retarding progress. Violent
personality clashes often occur in this scenario. Our advice is for both
to go and get involved in the new technology and in shop-floor activities.
This kind of external training together is the best way to resolve the lack
of understanding and appreciation they have for each other.&quot;
  The most sudden and debilitating event in family transition is when the
son must take over due to illness, but Nelson says this is usually the most
successful. &quot;In this situation, the responsibility is suddenly thrust upon
the heir. The survival instinct becomes paramount because this is not a
takeover; it requires total application from the heir when he is thrown
into that kind of thing. He is often fortunate in that he has inherited
an interest in the firm and is familiar with it. That conditioning makes
the family more comfortable. We usually see kids from the country cope well
in this situation as they have a better understanding for their dad's farm
than city kids who are less certain when caught in the business cross-section.&quot;
  What should dad do to prepare himself to let go of the reins?


</sample>
