The villa in Australia By Clive Lucas Clive Lucas OBE, FRAIA, is principal of Clive Lucas & Partners, architects,
Sydney, and has been responsible for the restoration of a number of the
villas discussed in this article  

`Villa', to most readers, probably conjures up the suburban detached or
semi-detached houses of late Victorian and Edwardian Australian cities.
But this article deals with the period before c1860, before the eighteenth
century sense of the word, villa, `was vulgarised' to quote Dr Mark Girouard.
  In 1827 James Elmes in his Metropolitan Improvements described the villa
thus:

The Villa (as distinct from the mansion), is the mere personal property
and residence of the owner, where he retires to enjoy himself without state.
It is superior to the ornamented cottage, standing, as it were between the
cottage ornee of the French, and the mansion or hall of the English.
  The term is never more properly applied than when given to such suburban
structures as those that are rising around us, serving as they may well
do from situation as to the town, and from position as to rural beauty.

  Later in 1833 the influential architectural writer J.C. Loudon defined
it in his Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture as `a
gentleman's residence in the country ... a place of agreeable retirement',
a house to `be situated if possible, in a beautiful country, within reach
of a public road, and at an easy distance from the metropolis ... the principal
front as to be seen from the public road, and to command a beautiful and
extensive prospect over a fertile country; having in the middle distance
a town or village, with its "heaven-direct spire".
  It was, as Elmes said, a house which stood somewhere between the cottage
and the mansion. It was the abode, essentially, of someone who made his
livelihood elsewhere and, in the nineteenth century, someone who made his
living in the town, a member of the growing professional and mercantile
classes who proliferated in the nineteenth century.
  Loudon suggested such a house as a retreat and recommended it being `about
ninety miles, or a day's journey, from the metropolis', but it was also
suburban, a place where the merchant or professional lived outside the
immediate town, a house set in its own grounds of several acres with pleasure
garden, vegetable garden, orchard and stabling.
  The other thing that the villa had was style or, if you like, architectural
pretentiousness, as a glance through the many architectural pattern books,
which abounded in early nineteenth century England, or in Loudon's
Encyclopaedia itself, will prove.
  London's book has, amongst others, designs for a:
 ‚2Grecian Villa of a medium size, for a Gentleman of Fortune ‚2Suburban Villa of Two Acres and a half ‚2Villa in the Anglo-Italian Style ‚2A Cottage Villa in the Gothic Style ‚2A Villa in the Old English Manner ‚2A small Villa, in the Italian Style ‚2A cottage Villa ‚2A double suburban Villa ‚2A Villa in the Old Scotch Style.  
Similarly, many of the pattern books included designs for villas. Examples
are -
   Designs for Elegant Cottages and Small Villas, 1806, by Edward Gyfford
  Hints for Dwellings consisting of Original Designs for Cottages, Farm
Houses and Villas, 1800, by David Laing Architectural Designs for Rustic Cottages, Picturesque Dwellings, Villas
&c., 1807 by William Pocock Rural Residences consisting of a Series of Designs for Cottages, Decorated
Cottages, Small Villas and Other Ornamental Buildings, 1818, by John B.
Papworth Sketches in Architecture containing Plans and Elevations of Cottages and
Villas, 1798, by John Soane or Designs from the Simple Cottage to the Decorated
Villa, 1802, by John Plaw.  
The prerequisites of a villa were that it be elegant, have style and be
an ornament to the landscape.
  In early nineteenth century Australia all houses with pretensions to style
were, in effect, villas whether they be suburban, in reach of the town,
or well into the country as homesteads on stations of thousands of acres.
In this sense they were quite unlike English villas which were rural retreats
rather than the principal seat of a landed proprietor. The decorated villa
was the best the colonial gentlemanly settler could aspire to as, despite
the rural wealth of the place, nothing was built which can be described
as a mansion or hall in the English sense of the word. Gentlemen here either
lived in bungalows as the vernacular verandahed cottage really was, or in
villas. It was a matter of style. Wherever such houses were built, their
designs were either taken from pattern books or were designed by local
architects.
  The beau ideal of a villa in Australia, to use Loudon's term, is perhaps
Rosedale in Tasmania, named for the Yorkshire valley from whence its proprietor
came. The house has style (Italian), and it ornaments the landscape set
against hills with the view from its terrace over fertile country and river.
As a contemporary traveller noted `Mr. Blackburn (an architect of this Colony)
has from a plain cottage converted it into a beautiful villa in the Italian
style'. James Blackburn designed this villa in 1847.
  On the Goulburn Plains, in the Country of Argyle in NSW - again on a large
sheep station - landed proprietor William Faithfull, built a villa in 1858.
`A suburban villa, with the House in the Italian Style' taken from Loudon's
The Suburban Gardener and Villa Companion, 1838. This design had first appeared
in Loudon's Architectural Magazine in 1836.
  By 1860 `villas' were in effect scattered across the settled areas of
Australia. Notable examples are Aberglasslyn at Maitland with its contained
villa plan; Panshanger in northern Tasmania with its chaste Grecian facade;
Killymoon, Fingal, Tasmania, with its geometrical preoccupation and its
basement offices is the contained villa in the round, as is Clarendon and
this makes them more in the mode of the English suburban villa than remote
country houses.
  The villa probably made its first appearance with the appointment of
Governor Lachlan Macquarie in 1809. The first houses with architectural
pretensions were built at the instigation of the Governor and his wife.
Mrs Macquarie, who considered herself an architectural patron, brought with
her a library of books including the 1806 Gyfford's Hints for Elegant Cottages
and Small Villas from which she chose `Design the First' and `Design the
Second' for two ornamental civil servants' houses built in 1813 in Bridge
Street, Sydney, just outside the gates to Government House. These were
probably Australia's first villas.
  Other designs influenced by pattern books were John Macarthur's proposals
for his Pyrmont estate. Here the design, a Grecian villa, is Plate XXIV
from Soane's Sketches in Architecture of 1798.
  The colonial estate agents soon took up the term `villa' and, then as
now, probably incorrectly applied it. In June 1815 we read `to be let ...
the beautiful Villa and Demesne of Vaucluse' advertised in the Sydney Gazette.
This was well before W.C. Wentworth had given that house style and created
the gothic ensemble we know today. Vaucluse was, in 1837, correctly described
as `Mr. Wentworth's charming villa, of classic nomenclature',  whereas in
1815 it was probably only a cottage, perhaps a decorated one, overlooking
Sydney harbour.
  The agent was perhaps correct in other respects; Vaucluse was the residence
of a gentleman (it had been let to Colonel O'Connell, later Sir Maurice
O'Connell, as a country retreat); it was beautifully sited in its own domain
and was within reach of the town.
  Sydney Harbour was a splendid place for building villas for gentlemen. Its
many inlets provided wonderful sites within reach of Sydney for the merchants
and professional men of the town.
  Henrietta Villa, an early substantial villa which adorned the harbourscape,
built in 1819 in the neoclassical style, was decribed as both a naval and
a marine villa.                                                
  Further up the harbour on Darling Point was a Gothic villa - our first
in this style - built in 1834 for the colonial treasurer, a Scotsman of
aristocratic lineage and connection. It was a villa in the round, with
basement offices, constructed by local architects but, most scholars claim,
heavily influenced by a Loudon design `A villa in the Old Scotch Style'.
Agents must again take criticism for their imprecise terminology, for in
June 1841, when Lindesay was first up for sale, it was described as a `Mansion,
built substantially of stone in the Gothic style with grounds attached ...'
  Perhaps largest of all colonial houses, but contemporanously with its
construction described as a villa, was the colonial secretary's house at
Elizabeth Bay `the place is now granted to Mr. Macleay who has converted
it into an excellent garden with a prospect of creating a Grecian Villa
contiguous'.
  As well as the harbour itself, there are numerous inlets along the coast
that provide suitable sites for villas. One such site was at Nelson's Bay
overlooking the sea where, in the early 1840s, an intellectual barrister
and his singular wife built a villa in the cottage style. Robert Lowe was
Oxford educated and his wife, Georgiana, came of an English landed family,
so it is perhaps not surprising that they created one of the most picturesque
and Elysian of all retreats. A villa needed educated and informed taste.
  The 1820s, 1830s and 1840s were the heyday of the villa. Several of the
suburban villas of Woolloomooloo Hill were designed by local architect
John Verge; one, Rockwall, the agents described in 1837 as `that splendid
Italian Villa' and at Harrington Park, Glenlee, and Wivenhoe houses
which relate closely to the concept of a villa are to be found. Camden
Park itself, with its extensive prospect over a fertile country, and in
the middle distance a town with its `heaven-directing spire' must in NSW
come closest to the Loudon beau ideal laid down in his Encyclopaedia -
except in the matter of style. Loudon felt the old English style was right
`in that ornate manner of it called the Elizabethan'. Camden was classical,
but then it was New South Wales.
  However, other proprietors, who did not have the wherewithall to create
a setting like the Macarthurs at Camden, took Loudon's advice on style
more literally. One such man was the surveyor-general, Sir Thomas Mitchell,
who selected a `villa in the Old English manner' from Loudon as the design
for his harbourside villa, Carthona. For his country retreat within ninety
miles of Sydney, in 1847 he chose a `Villa in the Cottage Style', a Gothic
design from an 1835 pattern book of Rural Architecture by Francis Goodwin.
  From the late 1840s the idea of the villa seemed to wane, the term became
vulgarised as Girouard has said, and was not used by gentlemen. The term
continued to be used by agents, but it was applied to town cottages, farm
houses and buildings which had no pretensions to style, nor as the residences
of gentlemen. Richmond Villa, Rosa Villa, Penrose Villa, Hampton Villa
and such names proliferated right through Victoria's reign and into the
Edwardian period.
  It is interesting to note that Verge, who of all colonial architects is
responsible for so many `villa designs', never seems to have used the term.
His ledger contains references to houses and cottages, but not villas,
even though many of his cottage designs were for gentlemen and were highly
finished and well placed. Houses like Bedervale, Wyoming and Rose Bay were,
to Verge, cottages. Even the highly decorated Tempe, which can surely
be termed a `Villa in the Cottage Style', Verge simply called `a cottage
at Tempe'.
  In the Australasian Sporting Magazine of November 1850 the following, which
is an interesting closing note to the story of the villa in Australia,
appeared:

Tempe this delightful villa residence ... the seat of A.B. Sparke, Esq.,
is situated on the western bank of the river named after the immortal martyr
of Ohwiee, Captain Cook. Selected originally as a retreat from the cares
of business, yet, within easy distance of the town, the spot formerly displayed
all those wild features of the unbroken interior, which yielded indescribable
charms to the seeker after the tranquility of romantic retirement. 

