<subsample>
	<id> F36a </id>
	


	<source> Craft Australia - Autumn 1986 </source>
	
 

	<h> Australian pub signs </h>
	


	<bl> By Linde McPherson </bl>
	

Have you ever been curious about the old beer and stout advertisements
featuring sporting heroes that recently adorned the outer walls of most
Sydney pubs? The few surviving today are quaint reminders of a lost art.

The tradition of displaying pictorial signs on the exterior of hotels has
a long history and it is to the old English pub that one looks to find direct
antecedents for our pub sign.

In 18th and 19th century, the British developed the association of sport
with alcoholic beverages. Inn keepers often organised boxing and snooker
competitions on the premises; steeplechase meetings in the fields attached
to their public houses. Archery was often practised in inn gardens.

In Sydney, Tooth and Co. adapted the British tavern pictorial signs to local
socio-economic conditions. The Tooth pub signs you see featured here reveal
an innovative and creative approach to brewery advertising of the 1930s
and represent a highly successful advertising formula which continued until
well into the 1960s.

Despite their initial similarities, Tooth pub signs developed a character
quite different to their English predecessors. This was partly due to the
fact that they served another function. That is, they advertised brands of
beer, not the existence of a specific hotel. The signs also looked different
due to the 'transfer process' technique used in their production.

This technique is similar to the manner used to apply registration labels
to car windows. The layout is first marked out in pencil on litho paper.
The design is then traced onto medium weight porous transfer paper, coated
with glue and undercoated in readiness for the design's completion in oil-based
paint.
  
Once the painting is finished it is coated lightly with a pale varnish.
When dry a second coat is applied and left tacky. The paper is then submerged
into a tray of water to loosen the glue size, lifted out, and positioned
paint surface forward onto the sheet of plate glass. A roller is then used
to remove all air bubbles and the transfer paper soaked off gently with
a sponge. The glue is washed away and excess water removed. The glass pictorial
is allowed to dry for twenty-four hours before the entire design is coated
with a heavy bodied paint to seal and protect it.

When completed the signs were distributed to hotels in the Sydney metropolitan
area as well as NSW country towns. Subjects usually related to the area.
For instance, coastal hotels featured beach scenes with lifesavers, bathers
and divers. Football pictorials showed players dressed in the local team's
colours.

Between 1930-1939, relentless pressure was directed towards the liquor industry
by the Prohibitionists. Tooth and Co. was concerned to enhance its public
image, deflate the 'wowsers' and gain publicity. Therefore, the choice of
subject matter was fundamental.

Subjects were highly idealized. The sportsmen always looked well-groomed
despite the characteristic vigour of the activity. Looking at the impeccably
turned-out footballers in the Tooth's Ale ad one is struck by the message
that football is a 'good, clean sport' which is enhanced by a beer for a
'real man', an upright citizen, neither a loafer nor a misfit.

In the 1930s women were not admitted into saloon bars: it was not considered
ladylike. The exclusion of women from hotels is reflected in the substantially
male-dominated imagery of the signs.

Women are, however, found in some of the pub signs although they are never
seen competing in any sense. They ride or sit beside their man as equals
in the cause of promoting the health-giving properties of barley and hops.
They are seen diving, swimming and riding thus giving their tacit approval to 
the product. They help to counter arguments put forward by the 'wowsers' 
relating to the harmful effects of alcohol.

With the passing of time, Tooth's pub signs became 'old fashioned' and no
longer economically viable. A more sophisticated approach to advertising
adopted by Tooths in the late 1960s meant that the pictorials became redundant.

Today, a growing interest in popular culture means that such advertising
signs now have another function and potential value as 'social documents'.
In recognition of their importance the Museum of Applied Arts and Sciences
(The Power House Museum) in Sydney obtained the entire collection of Tooth
pub signs as well as historical material relating to the company's brewing
interests.

The pub signs form an important link with social history, with advertising
techniques before the age of television and the present calculated
psychological advertising warfare. There is much to be gleaned from the
collection.

Linde McPherson has a B.A. from Sydney University majoring in the history
of art. She has researched pub signs extensively.


</subsample>
