<subsample>
	<id> F36b </id>
	


	<source> Craft Australia - Autumn 1986 </source>
	
                                                                      

	<h> What's in a name? </h>
	


	<h> The Art/Craft Debate Again </h>
	


	<bl> Julie Ewington </bl>
	

The art-craft debate is rather like the poor relation of aesthetics: thin,
unwanted and thoroughly exhausted. In fact, everyone seems to find the whole
question a bit of an embarrassment. Craftspeople resent feeling like the
lesser cousins of artists. Artists, for their part dislike being tagged as 
culturally `superior'. Robert Rooney's evident impatience in his recent 
contribution to the debate in Craft Australia (85/3) is a case in point. It is 
evident that re-circulating the old hierarchical distinctions so familiar in the
art/craft debate won't help us out of this slough of despond.

Better ways of talking about relationships between the arts and crafts are
needed and are at hand in new perspectives brought to bear on craft practice
by several recent publications on women's traditional arts, assisted by
handy ideas borrowed from the sociology of cultural occupations. For questions
of the production of artistic, and therefore social, value merit serious
attention, no more so than when older cultural forms are being radically
re-thought through the impact of the mass media.

Gender is the most under-employed factor in the analysis of the arts and
crafts. The classic concerns of the debate have been with the nature of
craft artefacts and how they relate to the culturally privileged practices
of `Art'. Only rarely has the question been asked: `Who is making these
things?' Robin Morgan's acid one-liner has surfaced before in this journal: `What
men do is art - what women do is craft'. Like most half-truths, this crack succeeds
because of what it conceals as much as what it reveals. For Morgan neglects to 
mention that `art' and `craft' are quite distinct signifying practices in our 
culture now and have long histories of drawing on different creative traditions;
what women and men tend, as professionals, to cluster in either one or the
other; and that non-professional work in the visual arts is almost invariably
organized along gender lines that amount to social norms.

In Australia the creation of the state Crafts Council and The Crafts Council
of Australia , with all their functions including this journal, has been
the work of women. This was unique among the new arts organizations that
blossomed during the 1970s. The crafts sector is still dominated by women:
David Throsby's Australia Council report, The Artist in Australia To-day,
reveals that 61 percent of craftspeople are women, whereas in the visual
arts situation is almost the reverse, 62 percent of the artist population
surveyed is male. (The only other arts industry in which women outnumber
men is dance. See Table 3.4, Artists' Demographic Characteristics: Sex.)
So the question of gender should shed some light on the vexed art-craft
debate.

Several recent publications have been crucial to my thinking along these
lines: the second volume of All Her Labours, the Women and Labour Conference
Papers, entitled Embroidering the Framework (Hale and Iremonger, 1984, Rozsika
Parker and Griselda Pollock's Old Mistresses: Women, Art and Ideology
(Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981) and Rozsika Parker's The Subversive Stitch:
Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine (The Women's Press, 1984).

The Australian collection, Embroidering the Framework, is as interesting
as it is diverse with articles on subjects ranging from the deliciously
seductive novels published by Mills and Boon, to the fascinating account
of why, after the Second World War, the Federal government of the day declined
to establish community and child-care*chld-care services. But one contribution
is of particular interest here: Patricia Crawford's `The Only Ornament in
a Woman: Needlework in early modern England'. This consideration of needlework
from the 16th to the 18th centuries does not attempt an assessment of the
objects themselves or the themes of the work, but offers a sociological
account of needlework as a socially sanctioned strategy for keeping women
busy. Crawford is careful to point out though, that the only women with
time on their hands (literally) were gentlewomen, and that the poorer women
were obliged to sew for their lives. The `craft' of needlework is revealed
not as one unified practice but several, pursued for different reasons and
with different results.

Apart from women condemned to what has been called `the slavery of the needle',
what did the highly-skilled creators of richly decorated household treasures
think of their labours? Patricia Crawford suggests some enjoyed it, some
accepted that it was a virtue to be kept busy, and some positively hated
the needle. Her own view is that the second response most closely represents
the contemporary social use of all this wonderful work, and it must be
recognised that Crawford is writing about one of the most glorious chapters
in the golden history of English needlework. She gives the final word to
a (male) commentator of the 1630s, John Taylor, whose view of the matter
was that the needle was entirely beneficial for all concerned:

It will increase their peace, enlarge their store,
To use their tongues less, and their Needles more.

In Crawford's account the wealth all this industry represented is barely
mentioned, nor the great status women acquired by their labours. For Crawford
needlework represented an elaborate form of servitude, but servitude
nevertheless. Her assessment that `... it gave a woman neither an economic
reward nor any kind of power' (p.12) perpetuates a denial of domestic work
in all its forms that was one part of the feminism of the 1970s.

A very different value is seen for the needle arts in the approach adopted
by Rozsika Parker and Griselda Pollock. Old Mistresses (1981) is a key text
in the reappraisal of art history's treatment of visual work by women. Its
great contribution is precisely to refuse to see women's art, crafts and
culture as evidence of unrelieved and unilateral oppression. As the authors
summed up the work:

We have tried to establish that women have always been present as artists,
but that a variety of positions have been ascribed to them at different
periods, and their ways of getting into art practice have varied and been
affected by different historical factors ... Women artists have never been
excluded from culture, but they have occupied and spoken from a different
place within it. That place can be recognised as essential to the meanings
dominant in our culture, for the insistent stereotyping of women's work
as `feminine' makes women's art a kind of opposition, a structuring category
constructed to ensure never-acknowledged masculine meanings and masculine
dominance. Such a position is for women themselves problematic and
contradictory, but also potentially radical.

Griselda Pollock, `Feminism, Femininity and the Hayward Annual Exhibition
1978'. Feminist Review, 2, 1979, (p.34).              

Thus women's traditional arts are accorded a new value by the authors. Speaking
about quilts Parker and Pollock write:

`... they are a distinctive form of art with different kinds of relations
between maker and object and between object and viewer and user which, as
William Morris foresaw, are in some ways richer than the relations of making,
using and reception customary in high art.' (p.78).

Morris was one of the first modern artists to realise the rich possibilities
of needlework and its historic importance in English culture. Rozsika Parker's
interest in it has flowered in The Subversive Stitch. It is an account of
English needlecraft  different from any other, neither endlessly descriptive,
nor dismissive, nor a `Song of the Shirt' whose only tune is complaint.


</subsample>
