Our wealth is our people By Phil Noyce  

"OUR wealth is our people", proclaimed the tourist poster from Cyprus. "Imagine
selling Australia with a line like that", I mused. My cynicism took a more
positive turn with the thought, "what a lucky country to be able to talk
about its people as a unified group." And as for the notion of people being
the source of wealth, it seemed quaint and folksy - good for tourist images
of a poor peasant economy, clever propaganda for a country invaded by a
foreign power - all up, quite inapplicable to a country like Australia.
  Comparisons with Australia did however, begin to provoke some important
questions, such as: who are our people? With migration upon migration, can
we ever become a unified group - Australians? Then there's the wealth side
of the equation: our wealth is our natural resources. Our people are our
consumers. Agriculture and mining have kept us living in the manner we've
become accustomed to. They've provided us with all that goes with being
a developed country - high levels of expenditure on education, health and
welfare, public transport, social security and so on. Food in our bellies,
money in our pockets and a roof over our heads are things we have taken
for granted.
  1986 has seen that comfortable view take quite a jolt, with the plummeting
of the Australian dollar on the world stage. Suddenly, it seems, we're out
in the cold; our friends have found others to play with and nobody seems
to want what we've got like they used to. It's time to do some very serious
stocktaking. What are our assets? How have we got into this mess? What's
happening to us and what can we do about it?
  The history of Australia's sources of wealth seems to go something like
this:
1. We have ridden on the sheep's back. We have relied on minerals and natural
resources for our source of wealth. We do rely on non-human resources.
2. Because we had the money, we've been able to prop up manufacturing industry
via tariffs and other forms of protection whenever it couldn't stand on its
own two feet.
3. Services such as education, health and welfare consume huge amounts of
the wealth generated from elsewhere. Our people are anything but the source
of our wealth.
  While that may be an oversimplification of our past, it's a recipe for
disaster if applied to our future. To underscore my case, let me add a fourth
point to this primary/secondary/tertiary sector analysis: `established'
Australians - those from between two and eight generations of occupancy
of this country - have been subsidised to date by schemes that no longer
produce wealth in an internationally competitive way. That is, economic
strategies that worked for us forty and more years ago have produced a new
Australia, with new problems, new resources, new possibilities but are
nonetheless redundant, wornout strategies now.
  For example, immigration, largely from Southern Europe, provided the
immediate workforce for post-war industrial expansion. Migrants came,
fundamentally, for better life opportunities for their children. With minor
concessions to the influence on cuisine, fashion, design, film and the arts,
the chief economic contributions to Australia that have been accorded
recognition by Anglo-Australia are muscle power and menial work. Now that
the need for this type of work is drying up (and their children growing
or grown up) we're faced with new challenges
  Riding on the sheep's back, living off mineral wealth and leaving the
dirty work to others has developed some rather insular, non-productive and
ingrained habits in the most urbanised country in the world. Australia's
mainstream cultural institutions - the ABC, the VFL, the universities and
school systems, to mention a few - reflect prevailing attitudes in Anglocentric
Australia that barely recognise the multicultural reality of this country.
We're now faced with critical choices between continuing along the old "she'll
be right" path or beginning to have a long and careful look at just who
Australians really are, if we're to make the best of what we've got.

 Education in an Industrial economy  

As Industrial tecnology operates on a hierarchy of management/design/assembly-line 
for production of goods, there has to be a system of sorting out who does what. 
Given the choice, most of us would prefer to be the supervising engineer rather 
than the labourer, the chief executive rather than the stenographer, the farmer 
rather than the farm-hand.
  For its part, the education system has helped Australia's industrial cogs
run smoothly by providing both training in the professions and trades and the
selection mechanisms to help sort out who does what. But getting the right
balance between the twin, often conflicting functions of selection and skilling
is fundamentally an economic, not an educational question. Or, to put it
another way, the social and economic requirements for selection are imposed
on education, which takes its task as that of minimising the anti-educational
impact created by the need to sort, stream and classify students for the
world outside. Education, after all, is about extending, developing, empowering
individuals and inducting them into the culture.
  Whereas credentialling plays a vital role in deciding and legitimising
who gets to do what in the world of work, education is also meant to provide
the chance for a better life for individuals and to contribute to the national
bank of skills, understanding and knowledge. Proponents of strengthening
this latter function of schooling have largely been regarded as on the `soft'
side of the education debate, the former being regarded as the economic
imperative. Education has a number of instruments to assist in the labour
sorting process, including the following:
System structures, which confine particular cohorts of students by the way
the institutions are set up - technical schools, girls schools, private
schools, public schools, TAFE Colleges, the universities and so on.
Credentialling structures, which define the currency ratings by which a
qualification can be valued and compared with other qualifications.
Institutional practices, which refine selection between individuals at the
classroom level, using methods such as streaming, ranking and grading.

 Enter the Information Revolution  

  If robots start replacing assembly-line workers, computers do all the
routine calculations and word processors replace typewriters, we find ourselves
either with a lot less jobs or a lot of different ones in need of creation.
Given that, our only chance to remain internationally competitive and with
full employment is to look to the creation of new jobs. What might they
look like, what skills will they require, are the central questions.
  Whereas industrial technology required the strict and narrow separation of
job functions, of clear divisions of labour, information technology requires
a convergence of abilities, a fusion of skills and a broader understanding
of the purpose of the task.
  It is the advent of information technology into industry, farms, schools,
home and office that has upset the balance not only in education but in
all of our institutions. If there's no great call for bank-tellers who are
a whizz at add-ups, what does that mean for maths at school? What does it
mean for bank-tellers? If I'm working on a machine that performs functions
spanning seven industrial areas, what does that mean about my union coverage?
  Take for example, the way I'm writing this article: a few years ago, it
would be written out longhand, edited, re-written, given to a typist, marked
up and sent out for typesetting, brought back for proofreading, corrected,
given to a designer and then to a compositor for page makeup. What I'll
do when I finish typing now on a personal computer is have a look at it
on the screen, make some editorial, typographical and layout decisions and
click the printout button.
  Between the current revolution in desktop publishing and everything in
printing since the invention of the linotype machine, clearly then, a lot
is happening. For example, WYSIWYG -"What You See Is What You Get", is
a name given to computer programs that show you on the screen what your
page will look like when it's printed. It means that the author is in control
of the product. It means that the divisions of labour created by the technology
of the Industrial Age - writer, typist, subeditor, typesetter, proofreader,
designer, compositor, printer - can now be merged (once again) into the
labour of one person.
  At its most profound, the advent of information technology heralds and
enables a return to Renaissance values and the indivisibility of thought,
creativity, action and work. At its most sinister, (and I would argue,
economically foolish) it could simply be used to wipe out jobs.
  In short, information technology has dramatic implications for work
management, for the structure of the union movement, for the role of education
and the content of schooling - everything.
  The critical thing to understand about the Information Revolution is the
concept and practice of technological convergence: the combining of computers,
telecommunications and information systems to form new tools. To use them
well (both in application and in the development of new tools), we need
to have general and broad, rather than particular and specialised skills.

 An international comparison - the Japanese ascendancy  

  The Japanese are in a position of technological and economic ascendancy
precisely because they understand this idea of technological convergence best
and build their work organisation, union movement, education system and
so on around it. People are described as `underskilled', never `unskilled'
and it's everybody's responsibility to raise the general skill and competency
level.
  This leads to what seem to Australian eyes as novel approaches to work
management and practice. For example, the use of `quality circles' (discussion
sessions that include all staff, from apprentices to management),
industry-based, rather than craft-based union organisation and their traditions
of company loyalty are only three of a whole complex of factors that make
the Japanese particularly adept in exploiting the emerging cross-disciplinary
technologies, such as `mechatronics': the fusion of mechanics, electronics
and robotics, or `optoelectronics': the fusion of optics and electronics.
These industries are now providing a wide range of employment in areas such
as manufacturing, information processing and alternative energy development.
  The fact that they have a monocultural society with values that, to a
multiculturalist, would only be described as racist, is a cultural reality
which has been put to great economic advantage via their work organisation.
When Mr Nakasone makes public statements to the effect that the Japanese
are more knowledgeable and perhaps more intelligent than Americans because
the US has allowed blacks, Puerto Ricans and Mexicans to settle in America,
he is apparently echoing widely held sentiments in Japan. Whether his
explanations are correct or appropriate is not important for the point I
want to make, which is this: a clear sense of cultural identity is the
foundation of a nation's activity and productivity, and in that respect,
we have much to learn from others.

 What does all this mean for Australia?  

  What does all this mean for Australia, a polyglot, multi-lingual nation
without a clear sense of its own traditions and a brief history of being
wealthy because we were naturally well-endowed. Clearly, it cannot mean
that we try to mimic the practices of cultures totally different from our
own. Equally clearly, we do need to understand better what makes economically
successful countries tick, (particularly where we import holus-bolus the
technologies they produce, if only to use them effectively and with
understanding). Most important of all, we need to reassess what our people
assets are and how we might best develop and exploit those riches -
international ties with the non-English speaking world, the language assets
of over a hundred ethnic minorities, the cultural links of almost one-third
of the population of this country who come from non-English speaking
backgrounds, the potential for tourism created by the devaluation of the
dollar, to mention a few peculiarly Australian assets, each with massive
potentialities for use in conjunction with existing information technologies.
We do, in short, have much more to sell the world than Hoges and Fosters.

