Telling Tales on Turkeys by Darryl Jones  

  The floor of a rainforest is a fertile and verdant metropolis, a shimmering
world where life teems among layers of decay. It is the largest of the citizens
of the rainforest floor that has drawn me into this twilight world, a bird
whose method of breeding gives it a particularly intimate link with the riches
of the leaf litter: the Australian Brush-turkey.
  Stalking these sagacious creatures in the quiet of their rainforest home
requires patience, alertness and one's greatest abilities of observation.
More practically, the bed of leaves needs to be damp and an indifference
to insect assailants is also essential. Today the leaves are crisp; every
twig snaps under the boot. No Pademelon or Pitta will ignore this clumsy
intruder this morning. Mostly glimpses are all I see; the scuttle and panic
of shy animals in flight, or the momentary stare of some defiant inhabitant
outraged at the blatancy of this intrusion. So often our style of inquiry into
nature offers only a transitory view, of disturbance and disrupted routines, 
adequate for a check-list but unsatisfactory for a closer insight into secret 
lives.
  A solution to such disruptions is, simply, to hide! And the best way of
assuring that there is always a hiding place is to provide your own. A good
length of hessian wrapped around three or four saplings serves very well.
It's cheap, light and easy to relocate. This one is serving its third (and
last) season, judging by the extent of the mildew and rot. Inside I sweep
the leaves from the seat, sit and squint through one of the little windows.
  Though my passing has scattered some of the early risers, the disruption
is soon forgotten in the urgency of the dawn call to exuberance. My
disappearance and silence as non-existence is soon evident in the continuity
of the life all around me.

The slight `crunch ... crunch' of feet on the carpet of leaves causes eye
to defer to ear; a regular `thump ...thump ... thump', usually in threes
quiet and even, is the Noisy Pitta. A louder, quite abandoned tossing of
leaves, this way, then that, relentless, busy and single minded: the Southern
Logrunner. Also loud, industrious and even more explosive is the Whipbird,
casting aside great feetfuls of leaves.
  But only one creature has the steady, purposeful stride of that approaching.
I sit up and take pencil and notebook to hand, noting time and place and
hence return to the practical necessities involved in this type of discovery.
  A large Brush-turkey has stopped on the edge of the area in front of the
hide. I silently swat the trio of mosquitoes sitting on the back of my
hand and lean forward to get a better view through the window.
  I note the bright yellow wattle swinging at the base of his deep red,
naked neck (` ... adult male ...'); then read the plastic wing tag. Once
white, for males, a year of dust bathing in the rich red rainforest soil
has stained the tag to a dark maroon. However, I can still read the number:
5 white is Cecil.
  A little more than a month ago Cecil, along with a small number of the
older males of this location began the arduous task of constructing the
massive compost heap they have learned to use as an incubator for their
eggs. For up to six hours on many days, Cecil raked all of the leaf litter
from a wide area towards a growing pile. As the huge pile grew the leaves
in the damp interior began to ferment. After about three weeks the internal
temperatures had risen to well over 40$degrees;C before slowly declining and 
eventually stabilising at around 33$degrees;C. From then on, having moved perhaps 
three tonnes of leaf litter and soil, Cecil's energies were turned to the task of 
guarding his castle from possible take-overs by other males, and to await the 
arrival of the females!
  It was about two weeks ago that all of this labour, this careful and costly
investment in his future was lost to Cecil. His closest neighbour, the
secretive and despotic Wallace, having chosen his moment carefully after
the main toil was over, usurped Cecil in a series of mighty tussles. Cecil
then retreated deeper into the forest and immediately started constructions
again. Wallace thereby added Cecil's mound to his own real estate and set
about patrolling both mounds.
                                                           
Cecil's forlorn revisit to his original mound is short lived. A deep, resonant
`mmoo-oo-oom' announces the arrival of his victor. Cecil, his wattle withdrawn
to a small cravat out of reluctant respect, rapidly retreats into the forest
depths. Wallace regally ascends to the top of his new mound without losing a
definite composure, the master of all he surveys.
  Unlike most other avians, and even their closest kin, these peculiar fowl have a
domestic arrangement all their own. Whereas the other Australian mound builders,
the Mallee Fowl and the tropical Scrubfowl, regard monogamy as sacrosanct, the
Turkeys hold much more libertine views. Liaisons between the sexes are frequent
but brief. Besides the brief period necessary for mating, time spent together is
limited to that required for egg laying. There are no pairs as such, and although a
particular female may visit a certain male repeatedly one could hardly describe
the relationship as a bond. Some females can visit up to three males during the
season. The males however, bound by their decision to guard their estates, must
remain at home and hope for a visit. Some make it, most don't and usually give up
fairly soon.
  Wallace has stood atop his ill gained castle, fidgety and nervous, making the
occasional rake at the surface. The transformation to a regal male, swaggering and
strutting, pecking effectedly at the mound surface is dramatic. Yes, quietly and
unobtrusively, a female has edged into the arena before me. Only by this
exaggerated submissive stance, neck withdrawn and all movements slow, does she
escape the usual violent expulsion Wallace issues to all other intruders. Iris, her
once yellow wing-tags also stained to orange, walks diffidently up the escarpment
of the mound. Wallace continues to pace up and down, pecking, posing, until Iris'
mien suddenly changes. From apparent submission to flagrant flirtation, she spreads
her wings and fluffs out her body feathers: the message is unequivocal to Wallace.
They mate, briefly and perfunctorily.
  Iris recovers instantly. No longer either flirtatious or coy, she is now a hen of
resolve and purposefully sets about raking and digging in the top of the mound. She
has an egg to lay, the result of another union of some days previously. (Whether
this egg is Wallace's is something I cannot say, but neither, I suspect, can
Wallace.)
  Wallace, having recovered from his rush of passion, now sees before him only an
intruder and an audacious one. He proceeds to cuff and peck Iris. She, shielding
herself with an upheld wing, digs determinedly on. Wallace's
harrassment continues. Twice he succeeds in driving her from the large hole she is
digging but she is soon back to her thankless task. Only when she is obviously
settling down to lay does he cease his attacks, and even appears to take some
interest in the activity. Iris is now almost entirely hidden within the hole,
having dug down to a depth that satisfied her numerous temperature probes. The
mouthful at about 40 cm seemed to be about right.
  She finally emerges after some minutes of silence, another of her huge eggs in
place, firmly positioned by carefully treading in the damp, warm earth around it.
This egg is only one of perhaps thirty she may lay this season, a total weight of
which comes to about three times her own body weight. She leaves soon after, sent
on her way finally with another savage charge by an unsentimental Wallace. He
returns to his domain, fussily filling in the hole and generally tidying up.

Wallace eventually leaves the mound to feed for the first time at around 8 o'clock,
a full three hours after he rose.

