By John Ritchie New Servitude  

I desired liberty; for liberty I gasped; for liberty I uttered
a prayer; it seemed scattered on the wind then faintly blowing.
I abandoned it and framed a humbler supplication; for change,
stimulus: that petition, too, seemed swept off into vague
space: `Then', I cried, half desperate, `grant me at least a
new servitude!'

 Charlotte Bronte, Jane Eyre  

The City of London sailed expeditiously to India in 3 months
and 16 days. Of the thirty passengers who messed in her cuddy
one remained at times distant and preoccupied. In shaky health
and out of sorts, Macquarie harboured grudge and grievance:
that he may have damaged his standing in the eyes of the
Commander-in-Chief harped on his mind, as did his unexpected
and peremptory assignment to the East; he was going back in
obedience to the Duke's orders, not by choice; he prickled at
the injustice of being returned after three attacks of the
liver on His Majesty's service had rendered him incapable of
bearing the heat of a vertical sun; he bridled at the ongoing
prospect of inferiors winning promotion over him. He was
unwilling to fathom why he had been spurned and unable to
comprehend why the world seemed determined to heap burdens upon
him. Apart from one battle scare on 27 April, his voyage proved
singularly uneventful, except for the calm morning of 21 June
when he sailed the ship's cutter alongside accompanying vessels
in the fleet and spoke with friends, among them Lieutenant-
Colonel Ralph Darling on board the Dorsetshire whose unforeseen
career in some ways was to parallel his own.
     At 7 p.m. on Sunday 11 August 1805 the City of London
anchored safely in Bombay Harbour. Landfall evoked Macquarie's
melancholy. In no hurry to mix with friends, he went to Jane's
tomb and vented his sorrow. His shriving laid bare his
relationship with Elizabeth: that he wanted their engagement a
secret had nothing to do with desire on his part for metal more
attractive; rather, it indicated that his memory of Jane - the
most beloved and the best of wives - had so enmeshed him as to
paralyse his resolve to start anew. A pale cast of thought had
enveloped his enterprise and action. In perfunctory fashion he
visited Bombay acquaintances, drank more than was good for him
and bought lottery tickets without afterwards bothering to
inquire whether he had drawn a prize or a blank. From Jonathan
Duncan he received a warm welcome, one of the best rooms in
government house and the restoration of his former military
secretaryship. In a long and intimate conversation Macquarie
told him about his erstwhile housekeeper and their son, while
Duncan told him of his plan to return to England in 1808 by the
overland route. Cheerfully and almost too readily Macquarie
acquiesced in the governor's wishes: he felt honour bound to
accompany him home and would recommence duties in his old post
as one of Duncan's family upon the cessation of the Mahratta
war.
     On 25 October Macquarie read with gratifying surprise in
a Madras newspaper that he had been promoted on 30 May to a
lieutenant-colonelcy in the 73rd, a regiment that, after
twenty-four years' continuous service in the East, had sailed
on 8 September from Calcutta for England under the command of
Michael Monypenny. He was therefore able to join his new corps
immediately and to be reunited with Elizabeth. Instead, he
procrastinated and clutched at straws: he had given Duncan his
word that he would return with him in 1808; he had spent £650
on field equipment which would be wasted if he now left the
country; the war against the Mahrattas, which would involve the
86th, was about to resume once the rains ended; besides, the
news of his promotion was only unofficial. Despite receiving
further intimation of his elevation to the 73rd on 4 November
and despite the arrival in Bombay on the same day of Hastings
Fraser, another colonel for the 86th, Macquarie chose to stay
in India.
     Taking ship on 7 November, he sailed 180 miles north on
the Company's armed schooner, the Vigilant, to Broach on the
Gulf of Cambay whence he rode on horseback 50 miles north-east
to arrive at the fortress of Baroda on the 18th. Six days later
he left in a bullock-drawn hackery, following his detachments
92 miles inland to the frontier station of Dohad. There, from
1 December 1805 to 18 January 1806, he took command of 1300
fighting men, Indian and European, to prepare them for
operations in the Gujarat against Holkar, a Mahrattan warlord
who had the temerity to rebel against British suzerainty. In
donning the habit of authority, Macquarie became energetic,
systematic and masterful. He saw to the fortification of the
camp, had a parade ground cleared of brushwood and forbade the
soldiers from entering the near-by township; he granted
audiences to local killadars, regulated the regimental bazaars
and effected savings in the gram fed to stock; he sought
regular disbursements for paying the troops, checked their
clothing and footwear and reported absentees; he dined with the
officers and yarned with the other ranks, introduced tougher
discipline and drilled his division for two hours twice daily.
Inspection followed inspection until the men were licked into
shape. By the time Major-General Jones arrived to supersede
him, the soldiers had been transformed. Then, on 21 January
1806, intelligence came of peace with Holkar. Macquarie's
campaign thus ceased. On the following day he departed, pursued
by auditors' accusations that he had broken regulations in
having exceeded his batta and table allowances. In explanation
he declared that the £195 he had drawn for food and liquor in
the seven weeks of his command, if not in conformity with the
strict letter of the established rules, accorded with their
spirit. 
     On 21 February he resumed a serene routine in Bombay. Days
accumulated into unruffled months. He barely found sufficient
of interest to fill seventeen pages in his journal for the
remainder of the year. Even state occasions elicited only his
pejorative asides on their monotonous pomp. His health
fluctuated: in March he complained of his liver, in May of a
fever, in between he was well; he waxed in June and waned in
July. He continued indecisive as to his future. By remaining,
he hoped to be £3000 richer in three years; he thought of
transferring from the 73rd to a regiment in India; he requested
permission from the Duke of York to continue on Duncan's staff
and persuaded the governor to solicit Castlereagh's influence
on his behalf. While plying in this direction, he tested other
currents. He applied for and received from Fort William the sum
of £250 for his passage home and curried favour with Charles
Greenwood, the army agent and bosom friend of the Commander-in-
Chief, in the hope of exchanging into the Guards. Dreading that
the 73rd, after serving in the East, would be posted to the
West Indies, he was prepared to buy his way out of that
eventuality at almost any price.
     To kill time, Macquarie furled his past and corresponded
with a range of individuals, some of them the darlings of the
gods, others the playthings of their sport. For Harrington in
London, he obsequiously offered to purchase any gift that might
appeal to his lordship's fancy; to Mr Fretz, the quondam Dutch
governor of Point de Galle, he conveyed friendship; to Dr
McGrigor in Yorkshire, he sent regards and the promise to meet
again. He wrote, as well, to his extended family: to Captain
George Jarvis of the 36th on a familiar note without saying
anything of his engagement to Miss Campbell; to Mrs Jane
Maclaine on Mull about her daughters' education; and to his
brother Charles, across the oceans wide and wild, wishing that
he would marry a good Irish heiress. He thought, too, of his
estate and determined to build on Gruline some time after 1808.
Finally, at every opportunity, he endeavoured to advance the
military careers of his family, friends and countrymen by
supporting their claims for promotion and, in the fifteen
months from August 1805 to November 1806, he succeeded in
gaining ensigncies without purchase for eight more proteges
and had hopes of a further four. He had not forgotten his
cousin John and nephew Hector, but thought it prudent to wait
until they approached the age of fifteen before forwarding
their interests.
     Above all else the calm of Macquarie's forty-fifth year
enabled two men - who differed from him and from one another
in position, temperament and style - to affect him
profoundly. Seldom diffident in his own resources, inwardly
diffident about his abilities, Macquarie looked for guidance
from Jonathan Duncan and Charles Forbes, for whom he developed
abiding affection.
     Born in 1756 to tenant farmers of Blairno in Forfarshire,
Duncan was five years older than Macquarie. He shared with him
a similar Scottish background and, like Macquarie, began his
career at the age of fifteen. Sent to Bengal as a clerk in the
East India Company, he served in minor jobs from 1772, learned
Bengali, Dutch and Persian and remitted money annually to aid
his father. His ability and the support of his uncle - John
Michie, a director and chairman of the Company - led to his
appointment in 1788 as Resident of Benares. There his
strictness in curtailing graft and peculation earned him
unpopularity among his personnel, while his efforts to abolish
the practices of geronticide and female infanticide by
transporting offenders to Penang incurred the enmity of some of
his native subjects. With the backing of Marquis Cornwallis, in
1794 Duncan received the gubernatorial post at Bombay. Taking
office the following year, he succeeded George Dick who had
openly flaunted his Mahratta mistress and whose incompetence
rivalled his meretriciousness. Duncan's sixteen-year term as
governor was conspicuous in many ways. Unlike Madras and
Calcutta where the British usually recognized only the most
powerful chieftains, Duncan acknowledged the status of hundreds
of princelets in his presidency, provided they allowed him to
oversee their governments. Those who rebelled, he crushed; to
those who conformed, he brought his brand of order, regularity
and uniformity to their taxes, to their ownership of land, to
their laws. Wishing to be seen as the Indians' protector, he
founded new settlements for them, introduced improved methods
of trade and cultivation to them, and raised the status and the
pay of the officials who came from them.
     In Bombay itself this reformer ferreted out extortionists,
embezzlers and those guilty of other corruption. Bringing zeal
to arduous tasks, he stabilized revenues and systematized
customs duties, built granaries, roads and bridges, and had the
streets swept and the sewers cleaned. Little eluded his
observation or escaped his report, his minute or his
signature.Though assisted by a huge staff of secretaries,
clerks and helots, among whom the highest paid did the least
work, Duncan showed phenomenal energy and industry, but his
penchant for minutiae inflated his dispatches to ten times the
length of those written in Bengal. By day and by evening he
appeared in a perpetual state of nervous anxiety; by night,
when he slept, no one dared disturb him. Over his basic good
nature and natural timidity he threw a shield. While gracious
and conciliatory towards his subordinates, with his directors'
approbation he held the reins. To him, a disagreement amounted
to disaffection: criticism of his conduct constituted an
attack on his authority; the one ruffled his temper, the other
left him mortified. Sir John Shore, who knew him well,
discerned another defect in his clay: Duncan was a poor judge
of character and his partiality to his friends blinded him to
their shortcomings, allowing them to continue their roguery.
In 1791 Duncan married Anne Mercer, but they had separated and
in Bombay he lived as a single man. In private he found solace
in the arms of his housekeeper, Mrs Jane Allen, who bore his
son in 1799 and took the child to England two years later.

