<sample>
	<id> G13 </id>
	


	<source> Migrant shepherd: Ober-Rosbach to Tenterfield </source>
	


	<note> 2005 words </note>
	


	<bl> By E Lloyd Sommerlad </bl>
	


	<h> Chapter 1 </h>
	


	<h> Ober-Rosbach - 1855 </h>
	

     Johan Heinrich Sommerlad had been thinking of emigrating from
Germany for some time before the day early in 1855 when he set off
for Frankfurt to see an emigration agent. His village of Ober-
Rosbach in the province of Ober-Hessen was no place for an enterprising 
young man to get ahead, especially when he was one of the
younger sons in a poor family. Ober-Rosbach, now part of Rosbach
v.d.H. (vor der Hohe - in front of the Heights) was an ancient
village with a population at that time of almost 1,000, at the
eastern end of the Taunus Mountains, and some 20 kilometres from
the city of Frankfurt-on-Main.
     Born in 1829, Johan Heinrich was the sixth child of Karl Christian
Daniel Sommerlad (born 1795) who had married Catherine Margretha
Becker in the Lutheran church at Ober-Rosbach in 1818. Karl
Christian himself was not a native of Ober-Rosbach, though there
are records of Sommerlads in the village as far back as 1664 when
the local church chronicles commenced.
     Karl Christian was a small-time farmer, trader and gardener.
The family was poor and it is likely that he rented from landowners
the two or three hectares where he gathered hay and grew fruit and
vegetables. This land consisted of various small plots outside the
town. Like all the local farmers, the Sommerlad family lived among
a cluster of houses in the village, which by this time had spilled
over the mediaeval walls which had fallen into decay - though
remnants of the walls and two towers can still be seen today. The
Sommerlad house (no longer standing) in Hintergasse strasse,
probably built in the 17th century, would have had stone
foundations, oak beams, shingle roof, and walls consisting of mud
daub strengthened by reeds from the river, between the oak timbers.
The house was very small for a big family. Downstairs was the
stable for their two cows and next to it the kitchen. Upstairs were
two bedrooms, so small children no doubt slept several to a bed and
some shared their parents' room. The house had no heating beyond
the kitchen fire. They would have liked cast-iron heating boxes
connected to the kitchen, as in the noble houses, but they could
afford no such luxury.
     Every morning one of the children had to go to the village
fountain to carry home buckets of water. The spring water was
clear and fresh; it was brought down from the hills overlooking the
town in wooden pipes to the fountain in the marketplace - built in
1833 and still standing. Other routine jobs in which Johan Heinrich
took his turn were to cut the wood and start the kitchen fire, feed
the hens and gather the eggs, milk the cows and clean the stable.
     The young Johan went to the local municipal school for eight
years. Instruction was rudimentary - reading, writing,
calculations and accounts, the bible being prominent among the few
books available for study. As most children had to help with
farming and harvesting, school hours in summer were from 6 am to 8
am. 
    Like others of his age, Johan Heinrich had to undergo some
military training but his was said to be &quot;slight&quot; on account of his
&quot;bad eyesight&quot;. At the outbreak of the German Revolution in 1848,
when he was 19, he was summoned to Baden but obtained a deferment
of call-up for one year. During that year the Revolution collapsed.
     The family was religious and regularly attended the Lutheran
church which, with its tiered octagonal steeple, is still a feature
of the town today. A highlight of the church year was the Harvest
Festival at the end of the summer, when the church would be filled
with sheaves of wheat and oats, produce from the vegetable gardens,
grapes and stone fruits and great loaves of bread for the service
of thanksgiving. Sunday was a day of rest as was Christmas Day and
Easter. Most of the village people attended two services each
Sunday.
     Karl Christian Sommerlad was a professional gardener and
worked hard on his few hectares with help from his wife and the
younger members of his family. The cherries, apples, peaches and
grapes from his orchard and the potatoes, cabbages, turnips and
corn from his garden were sold at market. Each evening in summer
some member of the family would sit in the village marketplace
selling fruit and vegetables. But the principal market town of the
district was Friedberg, six kilometres away. So each market day
children of the family left home at 5 am and walked to Friedberg,
pushing a handcart loaded with produce or carrying baskets attached
to a shoulder yoke. The family had no horse - that was only for a
rich man.
     The production of his small orchards and garden, however, was
not sufficient to maintain his family. So Karl Christian took work
wherever it was offered - cutting wood, grafting trees, helping in
the harvest, repairing farm tools and harness.
     The children of the family also had to look for work as soon
as they had left school. Fritz the eldest, was already 13 when
Johan Heinrich*Henrich was born. Then came Heinrich, 10 years older than
Johan, a sister Mariana and Jakob two years his senior. Peter was
two years younger than Johan. Another brother, Christian, and
sister Katharine, died as they reached their teens.
     Traditional crafts and trades were the mainstay of Ober-
Rosbach at this time, apart from its agriculture, and many young
men learned skilled occupations and sought employment as
carpenters, brewers, masons, smiths, butchers, bakers, weavers,
coopers or shoemakers. Girls, whose educational attainments were
generally low, were expected to learn home duties, help in the
fields, work as housemaids, and then marry.
     Fritz Sommerlad became a master shoemaker and Jakob Sommerlad
a stone mason while brother Peter was apprenticed as a cobbler.
Heinrich might have to walk each day for as long as two hours to
find work as a labourer, for which he earned only a pittance. Johan
Heinrich learned from his father the skills of gardening and fruit
culture - experience which stood him in good stead later on. He
scythed and gathered the meadow hay, reaped and hand-threshed
grain, pruned and grafted trees, picked fruit and hoed vegetables.
He worked on the family plots and took casual jobs if he could find
them. He also helped his father make beer from their own barley. In
spare time and bad weather he did weaving.
     Despite his &quot;bad eyesight&quot; Johan Heinrich was a very good
marksman. Sometimes he would hunt in the fields and woods near the
village for a hare, duck, pheasant, or pig and occasionally he shot
a fox. At the age of 20 at nearby Fredericksdorf, he competed with
many seasoned shots in the great annual shooting match. Muzzle-
loading rifles were used, and competitors paid a small fee for each
shot. The target worked automatically; when the bullseye was hit a
gaily dressed figure of a fool shot up in the air. Johan had
occasion for only three shots, as with these he scored two bulls
which beat all his rivals. The prize was a fine fat wether, draped
from head to foot with multi-coloured silk ribbons. The village
people of Ober-Rosbach gave him a noisy welcome on his return.
     As the new year of 1855 dawned, Johan Heinrich pondered that
he would turn 26 in February, and he saw a bleak future ahead of
him. Poverty was widespread in the whole of Hessen, and his family
shared the common lot. He was an ambitious young man and was not
prepared to accept the frustrations of his peasant existence
without trying for something better. He had heard of many of his
fellow countrymen who had migrated to America or Canada and reports
had filtered back of good opportunities for people prepared to work
hard.
     His family was not at all keen that he should migrate. It
would mean one less mouth to feed but one son less to help support
the family. His three elder brothers had already married and left
home. But they could not deny Johan the chance to try and improve
his situation. So he decided to go to Frankfurt to enquire about
emigrating.


	<h> Chapter 2 </h>
	


	<h> German Emigration-
Australian Immigration </h>
	

     The first half of the 19th century was a turbulent time for the
German people. Napoleon's defeat of Prussia at Jena in 1806 marked
the end of the Holy Roman Empire and until 1814, the French
occupied Germany and much of the rest of Europe. The inhabitants of
Ober-Rosbach as in other towns and villages suffered great
hardships and lost many citizens who were conscripted to fight in
Napoleon's campaigns. After his defeat, there was a regrouping of
the many small German States and Prussia emerged with new strength.
The German Confederation of States was formed, including Austria,
which was in fact, the dominant member. The German States, however,
such as Hesse-Kassel and Hesse-Darmstadt, remained independent,
with their own rulers. Frankfurt-on-Main, within the Hessen region,
was a free city and a sovereign member of the German Confederation.
It would not be until 1871 that Bismarck rallied to Prussia, the
rest of Germany and established a united German Empire, (which
excluded Austria) under the Kaiser Wilhelm I.
     Napoleon introduced into the conquered areas new ideas of
popular sovereignty and national rights. The period that followed
his defeat was marked by restlessness and revolt and deep social
conflict. Local grievances, demands for liberal reforms, agrarian
discontent and social distress culminated in the 1848 revolution.
A body representing the aspirations of all nationally-minded
Germans met at Frankfurt in May 1848 and existed for a year. But no
agreement could be reached and meantime the revolution failed and
was followed by even more severe repression.
     Political, social and economic conditions combined to make
many Germans so disenchanted with their homeland that they sought
to emigrate. Between 1830 and 1875 two and a half million Germans
streamed across the Atlantic to the United States of America. Apart
from the mass exodus of the liberals and radicals whose hopes were
dashed after 1848, groups of Lutherans fled Germany to escape
religious oppression. In the 1830s the King of Prussia decided to
unite all Protestant churches and a number of other German states
followed suit. The &quot;old Lutherans&quot;, in particular, bitterly opposed
the forced unions and refused to participate in the Reformed
Church. Their dissent led whole villages to move together to start
again in the New World where freedom of worship was granted.
     But the greatest motivation to migrate was economic hardship.
There was an explosion of population in Germany during the first
half of the l9th century - it increased by 50 per cent between
1815 and 1850. As yet little industrial expansion had taken place,
especially in small states like Hessen, and consequently there were
few employment opportunities for village labourers and artisans who
moved hopelessly around the countryside.
     Thousands of peasants who had earlier benefitted from land
reforms, were unable to pay their instalments and surrendered or
sold their holdings. In the mid 1840s both corn and potato crops
failed and harvests were bad between 1848 and 1853. In the south
west of Germany, the numerous small holdings of land were 
insufficient to support a large peasant family and desperate poverty 
was widespread. Emigration seemed the best answer and in 1850 alone,
150,000 Germans left their homeland.
     Under these circumstances of over-population and poverty, the
German &quot;small states&quot; encouraged emigration. In Hessen, for
example, a National Society for Emigration was established which
had an office in Frankfurt from 1848.
     Meanwhile, Australia was in desperate need of new settlers and
hired labour particularly agricultural workers. The early settlers
had been given grants of land and assigned convicts to work for
them, but when convict transportation from Britain began to dwindle
and eventually to cease in New South Wales in 1840, this source of
free labour was cut off. 


</sample>
