By Sally White Ink in the Blood THE SYMES - A NEWSPAPER FAMILY  

   Every morning from Monday to Saturday some quarter of a
million people buy their copy of the Melbourne Age. Tucked away
across two columns somewhere in the broadsheet pages is the
mandatory notice: `Printed and published ... for David Syme & Co.
Limited, at 250 Spencer St., Melbourne. Registered by Australia
Post - publication No VBF 1305 and registered as a Newspaper at
the British Post Office.'
   No Syme family member works these days in the five-storey
building which faces west over the railway yards, the docks and
the low, elegant curve of the Westgate Bridge. But the Syme
name remains, a daily reminder of four generations' devotion to
news and opinion.
   David Syme was born on 2 October 1827 in North Berwick,
Scotland. His parents, George Alexander and Jean Syme, had
moved from their native Montrose so that George could take up
the post of parish schoolmaster and session clerk of St Mary's
parish. His sons - James, George, Ebenezer and David - were among
the students in the parish schoolhouse. George was a hard
taskmaster, a man of a disciplined but contrary character.
   David later wrote that his father `had no idea that it was
necessary or desirable that his sons should find any pleasure
in their work, or even in their life'. The children had no time
for play. `Cricket, football and such games ... were not for
us. We had no holidays. We commenced our tasks at seven in the
morning and continued them, with short intervals for meals,
till eight or nine in the evening. There was no relief even on
Sundays.'
   When George Syme died, David was barely seventeen. He had `a
sound English education and some knowledge of Latin', but his
father's teaching had not fitted him for a career. James had a
medical practice near Glasgow, George junior was studying for
the ministry in Aberdeen and Ebenezer, a missionary-student
evangelising throughout the Scottish countryside, was soon to
start as an assistant editor on the Westminster Review. David
did not know what to do.
   During a visit to brother James, he was introduced to the
radical theology of Reverend James Morrison. Morrison's
teachings turned him from the orthodox Calvinism of his father
and David determined to study theology, the Scriptures, Hebrew,
Greek and Arabic. But he was an indifferent linguist and still
spiritually troubled. At nineteen, he appears to have suffered
a nervous breakdown and was sent to Germany to forget study and
take a water cure.
   After a year he returned to Scotland, health restored but
future still unclear. He took a brief job as a proofreader for
a Glasgow paper and then, in 1851, embarked on the Princess
Royal bound for the goldfields of California via Cape Horn. The
insularity of the American prospectors was not to his liking so
he set sail again, this time for Australia in the Europe, a
poorly provisioned and leaky tub.
   On his arrival in crowded Melbourne he had barely enough
money to pay the 5s charge for a night's sleep on a bed on a
tabletop in a Bourke Street hotel. The next day he set off on
foot for Castlemaine.
   The Victorian diggings were kind to him. He made a fair
living in the colony's main fields: Castlemaine, Bendigo, the
Ovens, Beechworth, Daylesford and Ballarat. But his last mining
venture at Mt Edgerton was less successful. He and his partner
appear to have been victims of inefficient claim-staking. A
protracted battle against the alleged `claim-jumpers' finally
petered out in 1856 and the young Scot began work as a road and
bridge contractor for the Central Roads Board.
   During the claim dispute, David had enlisted the support of
his brother Ebenezer who had followed him to Victoria and
become chief editor of the Age. The paper was somewhat
curious. Dependent on the advertising backing of establishment
merchants, it still pitched its editorial voice at the working
man. It was a staunch advocate of miners' rights and, in the
aftermath of Eureka, criticised the government's handling of
the agitation.
   Ebenezer Syme was a member of the experimental workers' co-
operative which bought out Henry and John Cooke, the merchants
who first published the Age on 17 October I854. Within two
years, the co-operative ran into trouble. In June 1856
Ebenezer, backed by several liberal-minded citizens, bought it.
Three months later, David brought a small amount of his capital
into the business and the brothers became joint proprietors.
   He used his mining expertise in compiling the mining news
for a weekly edition of the paper specially prepared for
sending to England. He also probably shouldered much of the
day-to-day administration for Ebenezer was busy campaigning for
the seat of Loddon in the first Legislative Assembly of
Victoria. But the paper's finances were shaky and insufficient
to support both brothers. After about a year, David returned to
road building and, presumably, to the wooing of a young
Yorkshire girl, Annabella Johnson. They were married on 17
August 1858.
   Within months of the marriage David was back at the Age.
Ebenezer had been suffering from tuberculosis for some years
and his condition was worsening. David both managed the paper
and took increasing responsibility for editorial content.
Ebenezer Syme died on 13 March 1860. Five days later David
announced the business would continue under the joint imprint
of E. and D. Syme but would be conducted on behalf of himself,
Ebenezer's widow Jane and her three sons.
   The first decade of David Syme's proprietorship required an
application he had not experienced since boyhood. He
breakfasted at 8, read the papers, rode to town and arrived at
the office at 11 a.m. He looked after financial and production
matters before lunch and then went upstairs to the editorial
department where he briefed the three permanent reporters,
edited contributed material, read overseas newspapers and
corrected proofs. The paper went to press at 2 a.m. and David
Syme called for his horse and rode home. He was rarely in bed
before 3.
   Wisely, he did not seek to change the Age's editorial
direction. Its competitor, the Argus, had become the voice of
the squattocracy but the Age, under David Syme, built on the
firm liberal foundations laid by Ebenezer. The campaign for
land reform in Victoria had already been mounted. David Syme
increased its tempo. The difficulties of establishing local
industry had already been noted. Syme publicised protection as
a solution. The movement for constitutional reform had begun;
universal manhood suffrage and the abolition of property
qualifications for membership of the Legislative Assembly had
been enacted; the Age demanded even greater change.
   The vigour with which Syme prosecuted his causes of land
reform, protection and constitutional change won him few
friends among the establishment. When the squatters exploited
loopholes in the Land Act of 1862 to secure - for a mere 100
individuals - some two-thirds of the 1 million acres sold by
auction under the legislation, the Age published lists of the
squatters' dummies and their parliamentary associates. The
government retaliated by withdrawing government advertising for
the paper and introducing a bill that sought substantial cash
sureties from newspaper publishers.
   The merchants, too, were offended by the Age's stand and
tried several times to organise advertising boycotts. David
Syme reacted to the boycott of the late 1860s by dropping the
cover price of the paper from 3d to 1d. The strategy had worked
earlier when, soon after Ebenezer's death, David halved the
paper's original price of 6d in a successful attempt to boost
circulation. It worked again. Within a few weeks, sales had
doubled from the 3d circulation of 5000. By the end of 1868,
they had trebled.
   It was the Age's vociferous advocacy of tariff protection
that particularly antagonised the merchants. While David Syme
later claimed the Age was the first newspaper to espouse it and
he was sometimes called `the father of protection', the real
pioneer was James Harrison of the Geelong Advertiser, who had
publicly advocated protection as early as 1852. The Age did not
enter the battle strongly until the 1860s when the chilly
economic climate predisposed people to listen to arguments
aimed at restoring Victoria's prosperity. Gold exports were
down, artisans were finding difficulty in getting regular work
and local industry was sickly.
   The squattocracy and the mercantile class, with their tight
control of the Legislative Council, were enraged by Syme's
calls for reforms which included payment of members of
parliament, a breaking of the Council's power to veto the will
of the lower house and non-interference by the British Colonial
Office in Victoria's domestic affairs.
   The Age's sedulous pursuit of extravagance in government
and corruption in the places of power did nothing to soothe
Syme's opponents. The paper attacked venal politicians with a
venom that kept libel lawyers busy. But its readers supported
the stand. Public subscription and donations from Age employees
paid most of the legal bills. And, by the end of the century,
the Age was selling 120 000 copies. It was the largest
circulation in the country and considerable even by overseas
standards.
   David Syme earned himself a reputation as an attacking
newspaperman, but he was also concerned with building the
colony. He advocated the introduction of compulsory secular
education and pressed for industrial and agricultural
development. He owned several farming properties and supervised
their running in minute detail and, through the Age and its
associated rural weekly the Leader, championed agricultural
innovation. He sent Alfred Deakin to India in 1890 to report on
irrigation projects and supported the plans of his former
agricultural editor, John Lamont Dow, who, as Minister for
Lands and Agriculture, helped extend settlement of the Mallee
wheatlands and gave rural subsidies to help establish dairy
co-operatives.
   The first factories and shops legislation of 1885 resulted
partly from the exposure given in Age articles to the demands
of the National Anti-Sweating League and to the details of
exploitation of home workers in the clothing and boot trades.
And the Age, unlike its competitors, drew public attention to
the suffering of the unemployed during the Depression of the
1890s.
   It was during that harsh decade that David Syme's health,
never robust, began to falter. In 1891, the Age became
embroiled in the `Great Railways Case'. It alleged excessive
expenditure on railway construction and laid the blame on
Railways Commissioner Speight. Speight sued the paper for
damages which, had they been awarded, would have ruined Syme
despite his growing resources. The pressures of the case, the
hard depression years and the changing tenor of political life
- which saw the rise of party politics and the push for
federation - all contributed to the lessening of David Syme's
fire and personal influence. But his power was still
sufficient to ensure that all Age-endorsed candidates to the
Federal Convention of 1897 were elected. His involvement in
every issue of the paper never flagged.
   David Syme was definitely a man of the nineteenth century.
He was a boy of ten when Victoria ascended the British throne
and he outlived the Queen by only seven years. He was, the
Sydney Daily Telegraph judged, `in a very real sense an
embodiment of the Spirit of the Time'. Inevitably, the end of
the Victorian era and the birth of the Commonwealth of
Australia saw his reputation as the most powerful man in
Victoria dim. However, when he died on 14 February 1908, most
Victorians still knew him as `The Kingmaker'.
   The year he died, the new Commonwealth decided - much to the
Age's indignation - to build the national capital at Canberra,
inside Sydney's sphere of influence. The Victorian heyday of
Victoria's ascendancy was well over.
    Although David was seen as the personification of the Age,
he drew heavily on the talents of his family. His brother,
George, having also given up the church as a calling, edited
the Leader. Ebenezer's son, Joseph Cowen Syme, became business
manager in 1879, a position he held for twelve years before he
sold his third share in the company for a reported £140 000. 

