<sample>
	<id> G25 </id>
	


	<source> The lotus and the rose: an Anglo-Indian story </source>
	


	<note> 2001 words </note>
	


	<bl> By Gloria Jean Moore </bl>
	


	<h> Chapter 6 </h>
	


	<h> Gloria Jean Thomson Moore, born 1935 (Part One) </h>
	

&quot;We were egalitarian. We had no capitalists.&quot;

  In the previous chapters you have read of the lives of an older generation,
and of their elders. What follows is my view of some of them (those I knew
well). I also reflect the changing face of India and the crossroads Anglo
Indians faced in the last decades of the Raj.
  My early years in India from my birth in 1935 until we left the country
in 1948 were indelible. India was always home. These twelve years were the
last, the death throes, of the largest empire in world history - the British
Raj. For a period of forty years, from the end of the Mutiny until the
beginning of the twentieth century, that empire had gone forward more or
less unchallenged. By the time I was born the challenge had gathered like
storm clouds which were ready to break.
  Reading the reports of administrators of the empire on the eve of its
dissolution, it seems clear they justified their continued presence by
pointing to the endemic communal violence, usually sectarian, among the
Indian peoples. The Hindu-Muslim question with its bloody conflict loomed
largest as a serious dilemma. If the British left would all order disintegrate?
Could the Indians run the country? The passions of religious strife seemed
to weaken the case of Gandhi and Nehru and the Congress for Home Rule.
  A noble man, the wartime Viceroy Wavell was ready to begin negotiations
to hand over power as early as 1943, once his &quot;war machine&quot; on the Eastern
Front with Japan was going well. But apparently Churchill refused to accept
this advice. The Congress leaders were jailed. Mass killings resulted, in
fearful riots among the Indian population. Wavell became one of the most
disliked of Viceroys by the Indians, gratuitously. Churchill represented
the &quot;old guard&quot;, who vowed never to surrender to India. They knew, when
it went the power and glory of the British Empire would go with it. More
than anyone, they knew it was their fairest Jewel in the Crown.
  If the British saw themselves as impartial in the quarrel between the
two main groups of Hindus and Muslims, they could hardly be impartial when
the two main groups turned their combined forces against the Raj. The passion
of any conflict is consuming, obscures other more human concerns, lingers
for years as charge and countercharge, justification and challenge. Locked
in this conflict for three decades, if anything it was the other minorities
who were better placed to see both sides of the quarrel and when necessary
to mediate on the levels where history is really made, at the level of the
average man and woman in everyday life.
  There may have been many Anglo Indians of the older generation who saw
themselves as altogether English, and passed into that group. Only the rarest
had completely joined the Indian block, for the Indian hierarchies were
self-contained and exclusive. After hundreds of years of life in the 
subcontinent, the core of Anglo Indians stood apart from the British and
Indian groups in a place of their own. Human rights were barely vaunted
at the time. The horrors of Belsen and Auschwitz were yet to be discovered.
The rights of the individual and of minorities were very fragile.
  The Anglo Indian never shared the dedicated, implacable passion of the
Indian Congress supporter against the Raj or any of its British people.
Most could remember a European male ancestor - whole families often still
resembled this strain. There were conservatives who looked askance on Indian
aspirations as &quot;radical&quot;, &quot;dangerous&quot;, &quot;violent&quot;. There were radicals who
sympathised with this evidence of Indian political development, who perceived
that the Indians were growing aware politically, and refused to be treated
like so many children. There were many varying opinions.
  Amidst all the strife there were certainly Anglo Indians who could have
been mistaken for Indians by some trigger happy British soldier and there
were others who looked so completely English, that a mob might have attacked
them.
  In microcosm in many homes more universal questions were inflamed by the
strife in the streets, and in the struggle for power. As India was partitioned,
so families were sometimes (if much more subtly) divided in sympathy and
resolve. Personal differences were sometimes tinged with the divisions of
the larger struggle.
  The Anglo Indian could listen to the Indian, moderate passion and keep
sympathy for both - Indian and English. No Anglo Indian was for instance,
a Hindu or Muslim locked in conflict with what was perceived as a foreign
religion. Even nominally, Anglo Indians belonged with the Christian group.
Picture their dilemma when they saw Indians shot down in demonstrations.
They were then accused by cultured Indians of being hypocrites - Christians
in league with rulers who used violence against Indian nationalism. Those
Anglo Indians and Indian Christians who loved the churches and saw them
as a civilising influence in world history resented most deeply the divisions
along the &quot;colour&quot; line and the &quot;race&quot; line, as all Christians became
identified in the Indian mind with imperialist oppressors. It was Gandhi
who was to use the ideal of non-violence, a Christian virtue, as his best
weapon.
  This was the political scene, as I grew up. It became as much a reality
as the first appreciation of nature, and the first lessons learned. My father
brought it into the house. He and his friends discussed every aspect of
the rising nationalism and the waning empire. Oppressed for years by petty
men from overseas who could scarcely write a letter, he identified with
the aspirations of people more oppressed than he was. He worked in the 
railways with Indians who loved him. Yet he was not Indian and disliked caste
and Hinduism.
  My father worked on the assembly of the giant engines for the East Indian
Railways at Jamalpur: by 1890 already 10,000 men worked here. During the
war the huge arsenal at nearby Amjhur, and the importance of keeping the
line of communications open to the Eastern Front, Burma, Malaya and the
North East Frontier of India itself, meant Jamalpur and its lifeline were
vital to the Allied effort. But the life of India went on parallel with
the war, and at Indian festivals or pujas the giant engines were covered
in flower garlands and my father stood before them, garlanded himself, 
surrounded by several hundred of his beaming men. As his daughter, I was
treated like a V.I.P.
  India was and is paradoxical. Despite all the ideas to the contrary, despite
the upheaval and political change, we grew up with a secure place there,
where we had lived for generations. Only when we left for other countries
did it become clear Anglo Indians did not matter as individuals, or as
Community. It was a sobering lesson. This rejection some responded to by
keeping alive the link with India. We were to learn more about Indian history
and British India from the vast literature and history written in the aftermath
of the Raj. We would find no mention of our own role, the crucial loyalty
which had helped to stem Mutiny, had helped to bring the modern world to
India. In the early days older men had wryly termed themselves &quot;cannon fodder&quot;.
An unenviable buffer between colonial rulers and subjects, our very existence
in history would soon be lost. We had not regarded ourselves as shadowy
people. We had had many qualities highly prized, but since they occurred
in a minority group no one had bothered to study this. We were egalitarian.
This sometimes militated against the genius, or the aspiring talented. We
had no capitalists.
  We had met very few English people in our years in Jamalpur or Lucknow.
The war brought droves of army men. In all those years only one was ever
invited to our home. He later married a neighbour's daughter, and was Irish.
The distorted popular novels which were to appear about Anglo Indians after
the war, largely fantasies, were incomprehensible. They parodied Anglo Indian
men and women, using their dilemma as the stuff of cheap novels and films.
Here the difficult situation of the Anglo Indians was blamed on them, not
on the prejudices against them for over a hundred years.
  After immigration, many Anglo Indians accepted that one would be hard
put to change the prevailing indifference of the mass to any interest in
India or Anglo Indians. Before that even, some felt drawn to the finer Indians,
fascinating as another culture. But the greater number of Anglo Indians, 
educated in that mould, probably identified with the British and saw themselves
as such, with a unique difference, a bridge into the India they loved.
  In our home, the two worlds were visible in my mother's European looks
contrasting with her Anglo Indian womanhood. In fact she cared more about
us as children than her own image. In looks she represented an empire losing
power. My father on the other hand looked much like his Rajput ancestors
in the distant past, through Sarah his grandmother. A martial spirit in
a twentieth century job, he despised &quot;soft&quot; or &quot;spineless&quot; men. His father
Robert had been brave, born soon after 1857 and Mutiny, in stressing Anglo
Indian rights. My father was brave through the riots leading up to
Independence, in admiring Gandhi, Nehru and the struggle for Indian rule.
He read the &quot;Amritsar Bazar Patrika&quot;, an Indian nationalist newspaper,
my mother calling him &quot;a blessed pundit&quot;.
  How much of the clash between cultures fuelled the clash between my parents
was food for thought. They were almost totally different personalities.
Softer, but able to enlist support in a roundabout way, my mother used tactics
which I increasingly understood as her emotional release, but did not like.
So I swung between sympathy for her and reservations about her &quot;politics&quot;.
  All the Thomsons except one of my father's brothers, Victor, came to
epitomise qualities she found hard and unyielding*uyielding - qualities
one usually associated with the British. She talked about this freely to
other people. It was a form of disloyalty which did little to resolve the
problem, and at its base was often deep misunderstanding. This came too
from her lack of hearing. It was impossible to explain things to her as
the years went on. She would get an idea in her head and run away with it,
or say her piece and walk away. She could be exasperating and provocative.
She seemed to like arguments and dissent. Perhaps it was a Protestant trait,
and both had it. Eva McGill had been Scots Kirk, Robert Thomson a Methodist.
Here it was a case of dissenters dissenting. I was drawn in as my mother's
ears and voice, a reluctant A.D.C., throughout my childhood. I ferried messages
between parents on the days when there was silence between them. I had the
ear of my father, who was said to favour me. Prepared to enlist this support,
my mother nevertheless harboured a dislike of me for the very same reason.
As the &quot;go-between&quot; I learned to work for peace and became peace-maker.
It was hazardous. From very young I tried to be judicial. This, my mother
imputed as being &quot;on the Thomson side&quot;. I was never to live this reputation
down.
  Our home was a microcosmic reflection of the Anglo Indian dilemma, caught
between two warring contenders for the right to govern, the right to be
the moral power, the right to win the affection of dependants. My brother
Alan seemed inexorably to become his mother's son, and my father seemed
to give up all claim to his affection and respect. This was of course a
tragedy, which it would be an oversimplification to blame completely on
the old-fashioned, harsh discipline handed down from Robert to George Thomson
- though this had its part. It was far more complex than that.
  Such were the undercurrents to our home. 


</sample>
