By The Honourable Sir Kevin Anderson CHAPTER 5 THE CROWN SOLICITOR'S OFFICE  

Before World War Two, there were few bursaries or free places
at the Melbourne University, but each year the Government
awarded five free places to members of the Public Service. I
applied without success a number of times, but in 1934 I
supported my application with a letter which I thought would do
no harm. It began, "I desire to forward herewith my sixth
annual application ..." Perhaps my jibe procured for me an
interview with the Board which determined the five fortunate
applicants for 1935. I found myself being considered, not for a
free place in Law, but for a Diploma of Public Administration.
This puzzled me, as I already had six subjects towards my LL.B.
degree, and a colleague who had not passed in any subject in
Law was being considered for a free place in Law. After the
interview, I called on Cyril Knight, Secretary to the Law
Department, a forthright and powerful man in manner and in
reality, and asked him why he had recommended the other
officer, but had not recommended me for a free place in Law.
     "I recommended neither of you for anything, Anderson," he
said. He was quite furious. "I'll have no one dealing with my
officers without consulting me. Leave this to me. You may go."
He reached for the telephone. "Get me the Public Service
Commissioner," I heard him say as I left.
     The next day it was announced that I had a free place in
Law. Wisdom dictated that I ask no questions.
     I applied for a transfer to the Crown Solicitor's Office
and in May 1935 I was assigned to the Common Law Branch of that
office. There I had a more sedentary job, seated on the ground
floor of the Crown Law Offices which looked out into Lonsdale
Street, where languid traffic occasionally passed, and cable
trams flitted daintily by. The window faced north, the sun was
caressing, and sometimes I slumbered.
     As an inmate of this prestigious building, I began to take
note of some of its distinctive features and was impressed by
the large frosted window above the first landing of the grand
staircase. The window portrayed a classically draped female
holding a tablet, with surrounding scrolls proclaiming Latin
legal maxims. At first, the maxims did not make much impact,
but as time passed and I perused the transparent wisdom of the
ages through which the daylight filtered, I began to appreciate
more the theory, if not always the practice, of the law as
embodied in these maxims.
     At the top of the tableau was the maxim, Lex uno ore omnes
allocutur - The law speaks to all with one voice - perhaps
more appropriate when the window was engraved in the 1880's,
for the High Court was not then in being. On page one of the
book held by the stately female was the maxim, Lex semper dabit
remedium - The law always gives a remedy. Sometimes I wonder.
On the opposite page appeared the boast, Lex nil jubet frustra
- The law never commands in vain. What would statistics show?
Finally, across the base of the statuesque female was the
assurance, Lex deficere non potest in justicia exhibenda - The
law cannot fail in the administration of justice. Cannot?
     Such were my youthful and cynical reactions when I studied
these maxims, but fate later brought me almost daily face to
face with them. I marvelled at their profundity, and was
somewhat concerned lest in some way I should be found wanting.
This confrontation came about when the Crown Law Offices moved
out of the building in the 1970's, and the building was
extensively renovated. The renovations included the
installation of several new courtrooms and six sets of judges'
chambers. And so, for my last six years as a judge, I was the
fortunate occupant of a modern set of chambers. By a further
quirk of fate, my set of chambers was fashioned out of the
north-west corner of the first floor, and included the room
which, years earlier, I had entered unannounced to interview
the Secretary to the Law Department. I did not dream then that
tor six years I would sit in the very spot where he sat when I
first saw him.
     Another feature of the old building was the dungeons,
which were almost underground and contained a number of rooms
where old records were stored. At a time when only the
Licensing Court, the offices of which were on the top floor,
seemed to have any money - licensing fees provided a sure
source of income - it installed a lift from the dungeons to
the top floor, which also served the Crown Solicitor's Office
and the Crown Law Offices on the ground and first floors. The
dungeons were seldom visited, and two of my colleagues - Scott
Murphy, who later joined the R.A.A.F. and was lost in the
Mediterranean when his plane crashed, and Gordon Leckie, who
was later Secretary to the Gas and Fuel Corporation - decided
to put the dungeons to some sensible use. In the least visited
of the dungeons, they set up a still to make orange liqueur.
Few shared the well kept secret. However, as the process of
fermentation and distillation proceeded, the aroma from the
still flowed gently out into the corridor and was wafted up the
lift well, which acted as a funnel to disperse the fragrance to
all the floors, not least to the top floor where the Licensing
Court, unaware of the source but enjoying the bouquet, stolidly
administered the liquor laws of the State. The ultimate product
would not have won a gold medal at the Royal Show, but, for us
who were privileged to quaff it, its origin and its rarity gave
it added piquancy.

When I went to the Crown Solicitor's Office in 1935, it seemed
that an era was ending. Several of the venerable judges who had
sat on the Supreme Court and County Court Benches for many
years were fading away. Until 1936, there was no retiring age
for Victorian judges, and some continued to sit into advanced
age. Though several exceptions can be indicated, it seems that
judicial office is a passport to old age. There is now in
Victoria a compulsory retiring age of seventy-two years for
Victorian judges appointed after 1936. Some compulsorily
retired judges declare that this requirement testifies to their
"statutory senility". Mr Justice Thomas Smith, upon his
retirement in 1973, is credited with having said, "I recognise
the wisdom of the law which requires judges to retire at the
age of seventy-two, but I deplore the application of it in this
particular case." He remained very active in the law as
Victorian Law Reform Commissioner for a number of years.
     Sir Leo Cussen, after twenty-seven years on the Supreme
Court Bench, had already died in 1933. It is my misfortune that
I saw him only once. He is generally regarded as the most
distinguished judge ever to have sat in the Supreme Court,
admired and revered by all, including Sir Owen Dixon. Cussen
has been described as being "the nearly perfect judge", the
qualification being explained to me by the observation that "No
one can be perfect, but he was as close as one could get."
Before taking to the law, Cussen had been an engineer, so he
had two professions. It was said that he had a photographic
memory and that, having glanced even momentarily at a document,
he could repeat verbatim what was on it. He was regarded as the
epitome of legal learning. It was said that if you could quote
a decision of Cussen in your favour you were far more than half
way to winning, so correct were his judgments considered to be.
He was always courteous; if the occasion arose to chide, he
chided gently. In a case before him which was being bitterly
fought, with sectarian and national overtones, one counsel
commented somewhat offensively that because of the conduct of
the other side, everything had got confused and mixed up "like
an Irish stew."
     "Or, perhaps, Mr Eager, like a Scotch haggis?" mildly
suggested the judge.
     Sir Stewart McArthur, whom I never saw, retired from the
Supreme Court in 1934. Bill Fazio once told me of a plea he
made before McArthur. There were extenuating circumstances,
but McArthur imposed a severe sentence. Fazio bravely protested
that the judge had not taken into account a particular aspect
of the plea. McArthur agreed that he had not done so, and then
said, "I must not appear to have wrongly sentenced the
prisoner. I did overlook that aspect. I set the sentence aside,
and will release him on a bond to ensure that the wrong
impression is not given." It was fair of him to admit his
oversight, and his granting of a bond in those days could not
be interfered with; but, nowadays, with the Crown having the
right to challenge too light a punishment a judge would think
twice before going from one extreme to the other.
     Sir William Irvine was still on the Supreme Court Bench as
Chief Justice in 1935, but he retired at the end of that year,
aged 77 years. He was a man of severe dignity and detachment.
Just before he retired, I was instructing counsel in a case
before him. I recall the case, not because of the subject
matter, but because counsel's submissions put the judge to
sleep, and he gently slumbered. Both counsel sat silent for
several minutes until the judge awoke, and then, without
comment, counsel rose to continue his address. Nowadays, a book
is dropped or an argument started between counsel, or some
other device is used to arouse the dormant judge, but that
would not have seemed proper with "Iceberg Irvine", a title
which he acquired in his earlier extensive political career,
in which he had successively been Attorney-General and Premier
in Victoria and Attorney-General in the Commonwealth. He died,
aged 85 years, in 1943.
     Sir William Irvine's successor as Chief Justice was Sir
Frederick Mann, who was already well experienced as a judge,
for he had  been appointed to the Supreme Court Bench in 1919.
Though I saw him often in court, the occasions for our meeting
were few, and I recall speaking with him on only one occasion.
His signature was required to some document, and I visited him
in his chambers. He received me pleasantly and chatted with me
about my work in the Crown Solicitor's Office. At that time I
did not know his earlier history, but I have sometimes wondered
since whether, as he chatted with me, his mind went back to the
days when he, too, had been a clerk both at the City Court and
in the Crown Solicitor's Office.
     This was, indeed, the case. He had commenced work as a
clerk in 1888 at the City Court and, after five years, had
exchanged places with Hilary McDonald (later to be a police
magistrate and the father of a stipendiary magistrate and the
grand-father of yet another stipendiary magistrate) who was
then a clerk in the Crown Solicitor's Office. After the ex
change, Mann pursued his studies, and eventually obtained his
M.A. and LL.B. degrees. Up to that point, there was substantial
coincidence between Mann's progress and my own, though I did
not obtain an M.A. degree.
     Had Sir Frederick been able to divine the future he would
have noticed further coincidences between his career and mine.
He obtained leave of absence to see active service in the South
African war and, on his return to the Crown Solicitor's Office,
he found himself supplanted by another officer who had been
doing his work in his absence and had been promoted. Mann's
salary remained at 200 pounds, and the interloper received 310
pounds per annum. In 1902, Mann left the Crown Solicitor's
Office and went to the Bar, proceeding to the Bench in 1919. 

