Liszt and the Faust phenomenon By Phillip Sametz  

  Goethe's Faust captured the artistic imagination of the 19th century like
no other literary work.
  It contained romance, magic, metaphysics, medievalism, science and seduction,
a wealth of incident, related in a diverse range of poetic forms, and raised
profound issues of humanism and philosphy. It symbolised Western man's restless
search for experience and knowledge. To many composers, it must have seemed
that, wherever they turned within its two volumes, an outlet for their creative
needs could be found.
  Almost every composer of the age was fired to respond to the work (Brahms
excepted), and the theatres and concert halls across Europe were littered
with Fausts of all sorts. So much so that Rossini, who long considered writing
a Faust opera, told a friend in 1858 that he had finally been put off his
`pet scheme' by the craze for all things Faustian.

 Goethe's choice  

  "Paris is in a positive Faust-fury; every theatre has its own private
Faust. This has spoilt it for me."
  Goethe himself felt that Mozart would have been the man to write the music
for his drama. He was not confident about finding a suitable contemporary
composer for the job. "It is quite impossible ... the repulsive, disagreeable,
dreadful things it would have to contain in places are contrary to this
age," he wrote to an assistant in 1829. "The music must have the character
of Don Giovanni, where gaiety is only on the surface, its depths being
profoundly serious ... Meyerbeer might be capable (of it), but he won't
enter into such a thing."
  The only major work inspired by Goethe's Faust that was ever shown to
the dramatist was Berlioz's Eight Scenes from Faust, which the composer
sent him in 1829. Goethe was puzzled by its experimental qualities, and
showed it to his composer friend Carl Friedrich Zelter. Zelter called it
"the aborted off-spring of a hideous incest", and Goethe did not reply to
Berlioz.
  Despite its faults, admitted in his memoirs, Berlioz was to re-fashion
portions of this work for his "Dramatic Legend" The Damnation of Faust,
a piece which became a major incentive for Liszt to compose his own Faust
work.
  Liszt accepted the appointment of Court Capellmeister to the Grand Duke
of Weimar in 1844 and, at the instigation of the Princess Sayn-Wittgenstein,
gave up his career as a travelling virtuoso four years later to settle there.
His industry at court was extraordinary; as well as composing many of his
finest works, he conducted the first performances of, among others, Schumann's
Manfred, Wagner's Lohengrin and Berlioz's Benvenuto Cellini, and revived
Gluck's major operas at a time when audienes were completely unfamiliar
with them.
  In 1852, Berlioz came to Weimar to conduct a performance of The Damnation
of Faust; Liszt conducted Wagner's A Faust Overture (composed in 1840) on
the same occasion. Berlioz's work impressed Liszt enormously, and he urged
Wagner to expand his overture into a three-movement symphony. But now Wagner
was planning The Ring, and felt that his style had grown beyond that of
his earlier work.
  Liszt's attitude to Goethe was sufficiently wary for him to be reluctant
about writing a Faust work of his own. Familiar with Goethe's Faust since
1830, Liszt told one correspondent in the 1840s: "The worst Jesuit is dearer
to me than all of your Goethe."
  To another, 12 years after the first performance of a Faust Symphony,
he indicated that he was not wholly captivated by the Faust character, either.
  "In my youth, I passionately admired Manfred and valued him much more
than Faust who, between you and me, despite his marvellous poetic prestige,
seemed to me a decidedly bourgeois character. For that reason, he becomes
more varied, more complete, richer, more evocative (than Manfred) ... Faust's
personality scatters and dissipates itself; he takes no action, lets himself
be driven, hesitates, experiments, loses his way, considers, bargains, and
is only interested in his own little happiness. Manfred would not have put
up with the bad company of Mephistopheles, and if he had loved Gretchen
he would have been able to kill her, but never abandon her in a cowardly
manner like Faust."

 Spur to work  

  In 1854 The Damnation of Faust, now dedicated to Liszt, was published.
The score's arrival at Weimar seems to have spurred Liszt on to begin A
Faust Symphony in earnest.
  Beginning in 1848 and simultaneous with his writing of the work, Liszt
was involved in the creation of his symphonic poems (the thematically linked
movements of A Faust Symphony can be seen as his most substantial development
of their implications). As a result of his pre-Weimar wanderings, however,
his knowledge of instrumentation was sketchy, and he enlisted the help of
Conradi, a composer of farces and operettas, then of Raff, in their
orchestration. By 1854, though, Liszt's confidence had grown and A Faust
Symphony is the first work he orchestrated himself; indeed, he wrote the
Gretchen movement straight into full score.
  The work's full title is A Faust Symphony in three character pictures
(after Goethe): 1. Faust; 2. Gretchen; 3. Mephistopheles. The first version
was written in only two months, between August and October 1854. This version
is very different to that we will hear in the simulcast; it was scored for
small orchestra, without trumpets, trombones and percussion (the Weimar
orchestra contained only 38 players), featured such time signatures as 7/4 
and 7/8, and lacked the choral finale and the "Faust Victorious" music
of the first and last movements.
  Liszt played this version through to Berlioz and Wagner on their respective
visits to Weimar and, acting on their advice, made revisions which gave
the work its present shape. This version was played for the first time in
September 1857, at a ceremony for the unveiling of memorials to Goethe,
Schiller and Wieland. Liszt continued to revise the work, however; 12 bars
were added to the Gretchen movement as late as 1880.
  As his Sonata in B minor (1852) reveals, Liszt could convincingly dismantle
traditional formal structure and build a handsome edifice in its place,
based on its foundations, when his music demanded it; this principle is
applied throughout A Faust Symphony.
  The similarities between the two works have often been drawn, and the
themes of both are manipulated and "transformed" (Liszt's expression), beyond
a point reached by Haydn, Beethoven or Schubert (in his Wanderer Fantasy),
for consistently dramatic ends.
  The sonata deals, obviously, with abstractions. A good performance will
submerge us in an ocean of nameless conflicts - good, evil, tenderness,
passion and grandeur all rise and fall before us, intangible and compelling.
A Faust Symphony is, on the surface, a portrait triptych, but there is little
doubt that Liszt was finally drawn to compose the work because he could
explore in it the very ideas he had dealt with in the sonata.
  Listening to the symphony is rather like watching the characters in a
play develop as they deal with different situations; a theme associated
with Faust's love for Gretchen can become sinister and menacing, that denoting
Faust's impetuousness tender and delicate, as the music progresses. The
work makes it plain that Liszt's formal instincts were dramatic in origin,
and in this respect he not only paved the way for Wagner, whose music dramas
were symphonic at their roots, but also for the tone poems of Saint-Saens,
Tchaikovsky, R. Strauss, Delius and so forth.

 Narrative forms  

  Yet Liszt's most successful large-scale works do not "tell a story", like
Strauss' Till Eulenspiegel. Liszt was only interested in narrative forms
as they symbolised ideas, and no more compelling orchestral work of ideas
exists than A Faust Symphony.
  The first movement, Faust, is difficult to analyse. Its five themes are
subject to simultaneous exposition and development, and the recapitulation
is fairly condensed. The first theme has been described by Humphrey Searle
as "the first consciously 12-note theme ever written", and it appropriately
presents Faust as thinker and dreamer. (Wagner was to use it in Die Walkure;
it can be heard distinctly in Act 2 as Sieglinde sings "Kehrte der vater
nun heim".) The second theme, announed on the oboe, assumes an astonishing
number of guises throughout the work, so much so that it is sometimes difficult
to recognise without a score. The three successive themes are also subject
to great changes in mood and shape.
  The Gretchen movement is a marvel of delicate scoring, a vision of innocence
only interrupted by the somewhat troubled reappearance of Faust.
  Goethe's Mephistopheles is the spirit of negation, so Liszt decided to
give him Faust's themes to parody. Mephistopheles "has" Faust, it seems,
and can distort and disfigure him as he pleases. The transformations the
Faust themes undergo are dazzling in their ingenuity, while Mephistopheles
himself is only given one new theme, taken from Liszt's earlier "Malediction"
concerto, where it is marked "Orgueil" (Pride).
  After a series of frenzied passages, Gretchen's theme returns intact (her
purity being beyond Mephistopheles' evil grasp) and leads to the final Chorus
Mysticus, which ends Part 2 of Goethe's Faust.
  Despite Liszt's feelings about Goethe and the Faust character, he reveals
in this piece that he, too, was moved by the universality of Goethe's drama
and its subject.
  But A Faust Symphony is an important work for many reasons: it is a meeting
place for many of the forces at work in 19th century music and one of the
most revealing and masterful works by one of the chief players in the drama
of Western European culture. It is also a vivid precursor of the freedom
in form and harmonic language that would lead to the very collapse of the
musical tradition to which Liszt had contributed so much.

