How Great Was Weber? By Robert Treborlang  

The German composer Carl Maria von Weber was born 200 years ago, on November
18, 1786; and ABC FM will honour him and his music with two programs of
his piano sonatas (11.00pm on Nov 12 and 13) and a special feature, The
Enchanted Wanderer, at 7.45pm on Saturday 15.
  With time and usage, the composers of old tend to assume a "divine" tinge.
Especially with the retreat of religion from our daily lives, beings like
Beethoven, Mozart and Bach acquire the aura that saints must have had in
Byzantine times and dead kings among the Egyptians. They could virtually
do no wrong.
  Was Carl Maria von Weber such a being? In Germany he is certainly revered
with god-like status, being held by many to be the equal of Beethoven. His
Huntsman Chorus, his Invitation to a Dance and several choral pieces are
as much part of the national bloodstream as wurst and knockerl.
  He was also the first to conduct operas with a baton from a conductor's
desk, and he gradually brought about a new seating arrangement of the
orchestra, which is the basis of that still in use today.
  In the rest of Europe, Weber, beside being known as the composer of Der
Freischutz, is also understood to have been the first great breaker in that
tide of national romanticism that swept the continent in the 19th century.
  Outside Europe? Well, you'd have to be a die-hard music lover to know
Weber's name or associate it with the sharp, fox-like features that stare
back from his better known portraits.
  But now that 200 years have passed since Weber's birth, Weber-lovers
throughout the world have official permission to bring their idol that much
closer to deificaiton. No doubt Weber parks, streets, conservatoriums and
factories will spring up.
  Finely wrought plaques perhaps with "C. M. von Weber coughed out his lungs
here" or "In this house the composer Weber had his first great nervous
collapse" will become commonplace. In London too perhaps a memorial will
appear with "On this spot Weber wasted his last remaining days setting to
music a worthless libretto." (Oberon).
  But the image of Weber is also an image of a brilliant energetic young
conductor, a first cousin of Mozart's, who had travelled more than any musician
of his time producing, organising, hiring, firing and composing right
throughout Central Europe.

