Australians an endangered species By Phillip Adams  

Phillip Adams is the Chairperson of the Australian Film
Commission amongst many other interests and occupations.

The Scenario is Australia in the 1980's. 
The cinemas are showing Soviet titles, the bookshops are filled
with the outpourings of Soviet writers and intellectuals. The
newsagent is full of Soviet versions of Time and Newsweek, and
Soviet sex magazines, (if that's not a contradiction in terms);
the radio plays little else but Russian songs, the overwhelming
majority of drama on the telly has SovexportFilm on the
credits, and they are punctuated by commercials run by
advertising agencies plagiarising Soviet originals, which isn't
surprising when 95% of the agencies have their head offices in
Moscow or Leningrad. When you go shopping to buy a suit which
bears a sturdy resemblance to Nikita Kruschev's, you pay your
bill with a plastic card bearing the insignia Soviet Express.
You work for a Soviet-owned multinational, your government
provides military bases to the Kremlin, and despite some
pretence to political autonomy, toes the Soviet line.

     Since 1806 Australians have feared a Russian invasion. It
was in that year that the first vessels from the Tsar's navy
hove into view in Sydney Cove, on their way to Antarctica and
Alaska, and they caused some consternation  among the colonists
when they fired a polite salute to King George. Ever since, the
cry `The Russians are coming!' has been as familiar in this
land as coo-ee, and our rising paranoia encouraged us to send
troops to the Crimea, would you believe, and to build Fort
Denisons and gun emplacements on every coastal promontory.
     But while we've been waiting for the Red Terror or the
Yellow Peril, in its various manifestations, we have been taken
over by the world's most powerful culture, and without a shot
being fired, except for those shots that were fired beside the
invaders at people designated our common enemy. And we've
welcomed the invaders as liberators. We've dragged enough
Trojan Horses through the streets for a Moomba procession or
the Melbourne Cup. And nobody says this is part of a
conspiracy. The American takeover of our cultural, commercial
and political lives is a consequence of their prodigious
energies, the extraordinary capacity of a vital people.

     But enough is enough. Where the British Empire was
established with musket and gunboat, America's empire has been
achieved with the friendly persuasion of comedian and crooner,
by film stars and flim-flim men from Hollywood. Through
cultural osmosis they have replaced our dreams with theirs
giving us a comprehensive iconography which we now firmly
believe is our own. It's an extraordinary irony that Humphrey
Bogart and Hemingway, for example, feel `right' whereas there's
something exotic and slightly unconvincing about a Jack
Thompson or a Patrick White. American culture is in our
bloodstream, and our neurons, whereas our own arts seem
artificial, awkward and anxious. We have to convince ourselves
that our culture is legitimate or even necessary, given the
totally successful subversion of American ideas, ideals and
idioms. We'd like to believe we've rid ourselves of the
cultural cringe, when it simply isn't true. What we have is a
chip-on-the-shoulder culture, rather gauche and defiant, a
contradiction in cultural terms. It's like trying to force your
way into a dixieland band with a didgeridu.
     In the BBC's Pennies from Heaven Denis Potter reminded us
that people in every western society measure their lives in
American pop songs, that their arias are the songs of Al
Bowley and Rudy Vallee of Crosby and Presley. The more
sophisticated amongst you might add an Edith Piaf or the
coquettish lyrics of Noel Coward, or some rugged verse from
Redgum, but our music is largely Tin Pan Alley or Broadway,
Motown or US movie themes, and while we might finish up at a
film festival admiring Wertmuller, like as not, certainly for
my generation your first cinematic enthusiasm was Weismuller.
Last year in Zimbabwe I was discussing the phenomenon, the
threat of globalism, with a black minister in the quasi-Marxist
government and we discovered we'd spent our respective
childhoods cheering Johnny Weismuller in Tarzan films, me at
Hoyts Rialto in Kew, and he in a jungle clearing, a little
black boy applauding the efforts of an overweight white man
while he subjugated eye-rolling parodies of African
tribespeople.

     The question must be asked - is there any point in
defending our national or regional or local cultures against
the American juggernaut? There's not a kid on earth who isn't
perfectly happy to accept Spielberg and Lucas as their Pied
Pipers; hardly a television audience that won't laugh at MASH,
and you could argue that America's cultural vitality and its
global relevance has come out of the melting pot mentality that
has lured film makers from Eisenstein to Beresford, from Milos
Foreman to Peter Weir, in to that Californian melting pot.
American show business has after all always been a product of
reluctant ex-pats, of enforced immigration. On the one hand the
vitality that gave it everything from jazz to breakdancing,
from ragtime to rock, came from the marketing of slaves, while
Hollywood was created by the people fleeing the pogroms of
Russia and Eastern Europe. It was such depths of experience and
despair, the desire to survive and to celebrate that gave
America the flair and the feeling that made much of the world
respond so readily and happily. We surrendered to the
seductions of American culture and little by little we lose our
authenticity and our sense of ourselves.

     Only one major art form it seems to me held out against
Americanisation by osmosis - and that WAS painting. Australian
literary and cinematic myth-makers owe a considerable debt to
the Nolans and Boyds who filled reluctant art galleries with
those sun-drenched paintings when the rest of the artists in
the other art forms were crying in their beer about the
fierceness of Australian philistinism, and Sidney Nolan did not
yield to the temptation of putting one let alone two Kirk
Douglases into his legendary canvases.
     So does it matter a tuppeny damn about a national or
regional culture? Are such things anachronisms,
sentimental fantasies, farts in a global windstorm?
     A few months ago I was having lunch with the Minister for
Science and Technology from Norway (I thought he was a
socialist, he turned out to be a conservative, but that was
only one of my mistakes...) I said `I know nothing about your
country.' He said `It's very like New Zealand in population and
topography and size...' I said 'How splendid! We'll soon have
a vacancy for a country about the size of New Zealand in a
local treaty, and if Oslo was willing to replace Wellington
would your prime minister be willing to sign the ANUS treaty?'
While considering this invitation he made a prediction I found
somewhat chilling - namely that the two discrete Norwegian
languages would disappear by the end of the century. Why?
Because of the DBS phenomenon, the Direct Broadcast Satellites,
bobbing in geo-stationary orbit over Europe, beaming out
American programmes 24 hours a day, ignoring national barriers,
flouting copyright conventions, orbiting counterparts to pirate
radio stations. `Every day,' he said `the children of Norway
learn another one or two American words.' The process seems
irreversible. And similar fears were expressed in most of the
countries of western Europe. I remember fighting to get Sesame
Street on in Australia. I first saw it in Prague of all places,
and was quite touched by it - not by the chanting of alphabets,
but by seeing black and white children playing together. A few
months after it was on air I heard my own children replacing
terms like garbage with trash, and biscuit with cookie, and
make no mistake a cookie and a biscuit are very different
things. A biscuit is a moral milk arrowroot, a cookie is a
rather more voluptuous creature.

     If you add to DBS a plethora of new technologies, the
process of cultural levelling seems inevitable. The
colonisation of Coke and General Foods, General Motors and IBM
must be triumphant, and if it happens won't it be a little like
the destruction of those earlier imperialists, the Christian
missionaries, of the cultures of Oceania, of New Guinea, of the
Australian aborigines? Won't it tend to leave people without a
sense of identity, without a centre? There are undoubtedly
advantages to a world that shares the same iconography and
language, that speaks a sort of cathode esperanto through the
success of American soapies. (Incidentally I met Princess Di,
and I said `I know your mother-in-law's favourite programme is
Kojak, what's yours?' She said `Charles and I never miss
Dynasty.' I said `Why.' She said `It's such good escapism....')

     Anyway there are obvious advantages if we all have this
inter-galactic homogeneity in which the values and beliefs of
the denizens of the Polo Lounge in Beverly Hills become the
aesthetic, the philosophy, and the mindset of billions. The
last Oscar ceremony was telecast to mainland China, in one of
Comrade Deng's more aberrant moments, for once you let in the
movies you change everything, from the dress to the diet to the
nature of human relationships. It's not only Ronald Reagan who
confuses films with reality, recycling dialogue from Dana
Andrews as true life anecdotes in his presidential addresses.
The confusions between cinema and society have been growing
exponentially for fifty years. In the thirties Hollywood
gangsters modelled themselves on Cagney and Bogart, who in turn
were modelling themselves on Hollywood gangsters. In Colorado
Springs, the base for strategic air command where every day for
the last thirty or forty years the failsafe bombers have headed
across the Bering Straits, the `Ops' Room where the Third World
War will be run from, or one of them, was designed by the
scenic artist from 20th Century Fox. The uniforms of the air
force academy nearby which is the intrepid birdman's version of
West Point were designed by Cecil B de Mille.

     If you scale that down to some of the fascination
interactions in our country I remember watching Number 96 and
knowing of the interaction with the general public in
Australia. The writers used to devise a perversion a month and
put it in the script only to find that it would be
enthusiastically embraced. One of the most spectacular was
`snowdropping'. For those of you who don't practise it, you hop
over the fence and knock knickers off a rotary clothes line.
Within minutes of snowdropping being dramatised in the
programme there was hardly a rotary hoist in the nation that
was safe from predators. When the producers would write out a
character or three from the show because they were asking for
too much money (they'd bomb a bit of the building) they'd get
letters from literally dozens of people asking if they could
move in.

     I have friends in America who were seriously experimenting
with the idea of marketing dreams direct to the public. Instead
of relying on one's own feeble imaginings for nocturnal
fantasies, be they wet dreams or nightmares, you'd be able to
pick up signals from a digital pillow, fanasmagoric images
produced by the best rock clip teams.

     So the tentacles of globalism, both the hardware and the
software are only beginning to embrace us, and overwhelmingly
its values and its fashions are coming from a few square miles
in California, aided and abetted by such talented ex-pats as
Weir, Beresford, Schepsi, Armstrong and Miller.
     I'm not entirely convinced that the battle is lost. It's
fascinating to look at a society like Britain which
counterposes, at least on television a vigorous local culture.
It places strict limits on the amount of American television
that the networks are permitted to screen. In the light of the
anxieties of Norway's minister for science, I find it
comforting that after 60 years of radio and forty years of
television, the regional accents of Britain survive. They laugh at Lucy
and Bilko and Mary Tyler Moore and MASH but they still maintain some of
their idiosyncracies, most particularly the specificity of the way they
speak. 

