<sample>
	<id> G46 </id>
	


	<source> Artlink - June/July 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2067 words </note>
	


	<h> Swifties </h>
	


	<bl> By Meaghan Morris </bl>
	

1. `Our orthodoxy is made up of narrations of `what's going on'.
Michel de Certeau, `The Jabbering of Social Life'.

2. ` ... while poor old fellows like myself, who've been battling
on, working our pants off for twenty years, get overlooked.' 
Arthur McIntyre, `Pop Goes The Easel'.

3. `In short, the right to slowness is an ecological problem.'
Roland Barthes, `Day By Day with Roland Barthes'.

First, a note of explanation about my topic. I won't be talking
today about the questions of quotation, appropriation, image-theft
or `nomadology' that the programme suggested an `Art in the Fast
Lane' forum might take up. When this forum was being organized, the
speakers were all asked to supply a title and a brief outline of an
argument. The first thing to emerge from the responses was that we
had each taken up, in different ways, the `fast lane' aspect of the
general proposition, rather than the theme of `quotation'. I feel
obliged to explain why my own paper will mostly ignore that theme.
   I assume that what links quotation-appropriation-nomadology-
fast-lane-etc ... together is a more general notion of rapid
turnover in art and ideas. It's the hit-and-run metaphor of
contemporary action - the Grab What You Need, Hit The Road Jack,
imperative. When thinking about this metaphor, and the romance of
criminality that often accompanies its use (a romance deriving from
that very sedate classical motif of the artist as thief, the
Promethean figure of the firestealer), it occurred to me that what
those of us who do criticism were really being asked to do here
was, at one level, either to practise or to debate criticism as a
form of minor crime: criticism as a con-job, as a shifty art of
promotion, a process of pulling swifties. `Art in the Fast Lane',
then, as a forum about speed and fashion, and the impact of both on
people's ways of working.
   I did think about using the term `quickies' for this problem;
but then realized immediately that there is a fascinating abyss
between proposing to pull a swiftie, and offering an audience a
quickie. I'll back off, if I can, from the back seat image. But I'd
like to maintain the distinction by saying that the whole matter of
art and quotation, art and appropriation, seems to be swiftly
receding - fortunately - some way behind us on the fashion highway,
and this is one good reason for not doing a quickie about it.
   I say `fortunately', because I think that when the issue of
quotation is taken seriously (which it really hasn't been here by
criticism, though it has by the work of some artists), then the
problems it poses are likely to form part of the landscape as we
move for a very long time to come. Because `quotation' is a problem
about history, about art's history, and about history in art. It's
a long duration problem, one better dealt with slowly, and one that
shouldn't be trivialized. So it's a sort of road safety measure to
refuse to do a quickie about it: particularly since a serious
consideration should begin by starting to wonder about differences
between procedures of quotation, reference, allusion, pastiche -
and what these differences might mean in visual terms. What would
it mean, for example, to claim that a particular artwork was a
`literal' quotation of a set of verbal theoretical propositions
about quotation?
   Rather than trying to zip through these difficulties in fifteen
minutes, I want to make four brief points instead about the image of
the fast lane itself. 
1. I agree with George Alexander's suggestion that a certain
strategic slowness may be a useful response to rapid turnover.
   However I'm not convinced that the image of a multi-lane
highway, with streaming into `fast' and `slow', is at all
appropriate to what's been going on in Australian art and art-
debates during the past year or so.
   I'm happy to stay with the images of the road and of movement.
But rather than the highspeed purring, zooming and revving sounds
associated with super-highways, what I hear sounds more like the
squeal of brakes, the ominous bumps announcing yet another
punctured tyre, and the sickening thuds from proliferating potholes
that let you know (whatever the Bicentennial Authority billboards
might say) that there's not enough money being spent on the road.
   Besides - while we do have, of course, our superhighways
(including that wide fast lane in the sky), there's an archetypal,
imaginary Australian road that is something different from a
superhighway and allows the problem of rapidity to be restated in
different terms. This imaginary road isn't a multi-lane highway.
It's a patchy bitumen job: two sides, single-lane, a fading line
along the middle and sudden death at every bend. Or it's a dirt
highway: no sides, no lanes, no line, maybe no bends; and sudden
death in the heart and eye of every driver seeing that other car,
that little cloud of dust moving up in the distance, slowly closer
and closer at a speed sustained and with indecision prolonged until
the very last moment when someone must decide whether to move over,
and who is going to make the move. There's an Australian film about
that, called Running On Empty, and I think it flopped at the box
office.
   In fact, anyone who still remembers Australian films may also
remember that from Backroads to Buddies, from The Cars That Ate
Paris to Mad Max III, the classical, imaginary Australian road is
fast all over. Or rather, it's unpredictable all over. There you
are on the road, pottling along happily ... but you never know when
some maniac is going to hove into view, wipe you out at worst, or
just run you right off the road. Driving in those conditions seems
to me to bear some relation to the experience of trying to work
regularly at any level, in any capacity, in Australian cultural
activities.
   Some of the most poignant and perfect images of life and art on
Australian roads are on show at this Australian Festival, in the
`peculiar South Australian ceramics' show, Skangaroovian Funk. I
mean Margaret Dodd's ceramic cars: for example, her Ravaged Holden,
its pink seats ripped out and laid askew alongside the wasted
wreck; and her Blue Cloud, in which an unknown lifetime of love and
obsession clings to one sacred, battered object. 
   To mention those films, and the work of Margaret Dodd, is to say 
that there is a great deal of Australian art that already talks about 
speed, culture and our landscapes, and that it can be useful to use 
that art as a point of departure rather than the equally available 
image of the zippy international racer, hair now neatly slicked back 
and down as the sports car heads for the horizon.
2. So to make my second point, an argument against the use of rapid
change in fashion to block movement and hog the road, I'll begin
from one of the apparently inexhaustible founding texts of
Australian culture, `The Drover's Wife' by Henry Lawson. 
   The following quotation, I should stress, is also a quotation from
Helen Grace's film Serious Undertakings, in which almost the same
bit of text appears; and it's also a tribute to some of the themes
of Margaret Dodd's film, This Woman Is Not A Car: 
   All days are much the same to her; but on Sunday afternoon she 
   dresses herself, tidies the children, smartens up baby, and goes 
   for a lonely walk along the bush-track, pushing an old perambulator 
   in front of her. She does this every Sunday. She takes as much care 
   to make herself and the children look smart as she would if she were 
   going to do the block in the city. There is nothing to see, however, 
   and not a soul to meet. You might walk for twenty miles along this 
   track without being able to fix a point in your mind, unless you are 
   a bushman. 
   This text reminds us that a lack of stability and fixity, the 
condition of journeying on all dressed up without being able to
fix a point in your mind, is not necessarily only a problem for
those who scramble to be in the newest and fastest car. It's also
an older and enduring problem of one's relationship to `landscape',
in the sense that any context does impose certain conditions
(though without determining all possible responses). Bruce Petty
spoke earlier at Artists' Week about the effect of sameness and
monotony in much contemporary cultural activity, the feeling that
no matter how you dress or where you go, you're always going to the
same event. This may be one of the effects of speed today, as it
was of isolation for the drover's wife.
   One difference, however, between Lawson's story of movement and
contemporary problems (in relation to which I've used the Lawson
quotation as an allegory) is that Lawson has a figure who can fix
points in the sameness: the bushman (`You might walk for twenty
miles along this track without being able to fix a point in your
mind, unless you are a bushman'). The bushman's skill in fixing
points is the product of a practice, and a knowledge. If today, in
art, point-fixing still goes on, then it does so in the terms
described by Helen Grace in her paper on the arbitrary creation of
temporary value. No single figures (critics, curators, artists) `do
it': it is a process that takes place through a number of
institutions.
   Nevertheless, a lot of sanctity is attached to the ideal of the
point-fixer. To appear to be the one to define for others `where
we're going' or `where it's at' or `what's going on' - the very
definition of orthodoxy in Michel de Certeau's terms, orthodoxy
which is no less orthodox for being strictly ephemeral. - to assume
this appearance is today the stake of much critical and artistic
competition, rivalry, gaming. If for Lawson's bushman, the capacity
to fix points comes from a long familiarity with the same place
that makes it always full of differences, the mythology of fashion
today requires that anyone in the race must always be seen to be
one step ahead of any single point on the long road to nowhere in
particular, and away from wherever we were.
   I agree with Peter Schjeldahl that you can't stop fashion, or
stop the creation of orthodoxy through breathless gossip and
posing. I also agree that it's repressive, as well as pointless and
futile, to try to stop fashion - particularly since fashion
(including breathless gossip) is one of the few immediately
accessible sources of creativity, replenishment, hope and gaiety
that most people have in our lives.
   At the same time, there is a related activity which seems to me
to be, in this context, a form of bad, hostile driving manners - a
terroristic act of hogging the road. This is what happens every
time that an artist, a writer, a critic or indeed a curator turns
the proposition `you can't stop fashion' round, and uses fashion,
or claims about fashionability, in order to stop new things, other
things, or old things, from happening or continuing. This is the
use of the myth of speed to stop movement, regulate flows, block
the road. It often happens, oddly enough, through the use of the
little word STILL: ... `are you STILL doing that ? ... '
   I think that Peter Schjeldahl did it himself a couple of times
in his lecture, with throwaway lines about the theatre on at this
Festival, and about post-structuralist and deconstructive
criticism. It's the `that was way back then' way of not-addressing
issues, and so not moving on from them. It is particularly popular
in Australian arts journalism, and is one of the reasons why that
journalism is so drearily repetitive, and so earnestly behind the
times. Australian experimental filmmakers in particular have suffered from that
sort of treatment; not only from local critics who deem it an argument to
declare new work `dated', but also from overseas visitors (I'm thinking in
particular here of a film talk by Derek Malcolm of The Guardian) who described
Australian films as `behind the times' - as though they can only see work in a
new place by stating that they themselves are coming from somewhere else. 


</sample>
