<sample>
	<id> G52 </id>
	


	<source> In Future - July/August 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2016 words </note>
	


	<h> Living by our wits </h>
	


	<bl> By Barry Jones </bl>
	

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY have changed the quality, length and direction of
life in the past century far more than politics, education, ideology or
religion. Ford and Edison shaped human experience more broadly and enduringly
than Lenin and Hitler. Modern war would have been impossible - even unthinkable
- without modern technological capacity.
  Nevertheless, the sheer pervasiveness of scientific and technological
development and its impact on how people live, and their capacity to make
appropriate individual or collective choices, has been either ignored or
considered too late to influence outcomes significantly.
  In the past twenty years there have been many examples of technological
change where social implications were virtually ignored until after the
technologies had been adopted.
  Three examples illustrate the point: the expansion of car-based cities,
the adoption of efficient contraception (especially the pill), and television
as a major time absorber.
  The relative merits of the `dispersed city' model versus the `compact
city' model were never argued out in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane or Perth
in the 1960s. Australian cities just grew like Topsy. It was only in the
mid-1970s, ten or fifteen years too late, that politicians, journalists
and social planners began asking why Australia had such serious problems
with road capacity, freeways, pollution, congestion, excessive commuting
time and distance, why there were featureless, physically divided and
under-serviced suburbs with little life or occupation of their own. But
were these problems avoidable? Could they have been recognised in advance?
Why were they never addressed? What options were open? How were spending
priorities determined as between roads and schools and sewerage? Who made
the basic decisions? Did they have a vested interest? 
  The contraceptive pill has had revolutionary and liberating effects on
women and will be seen as a turning point in social, economic and political
history. Nevertheless, although its impact on changing labour force composition
should have been obvious, there is little contemporary evidence that this
was ever examined or discussed. The implications for future job choice (and
education) were ignored. But wasn't it always obvious that there would be
a relationship between reliable contraception and women being employed
in the future as crane operators, engineers, pilots and army personnel?
Were `worst case' scenarios examined for potential adverse side effects
on the users?
  The prospect of television was welcomed in the 1950s as a major force
for education and stimulation. How has it worked out? In practice it has
had a far more sedative than stimulatory effect. It is now a greater time
absorber for children than school, and for many adults, absorbs more time
than work. The impact of television on journalism, forcing newspapers even
further into the entertainment and gambling business, should have been
recognised, but was not: similarly the contrast between classroom experience
which is demanding, static and often boring, and television, which is
non-demanding, variegated and aimed at instant gratification. What are the
social implications? What has been the education response? Were the issues
ever argued over? Were there any options then? Are there now?
  The role of the Commission for the Future is to raise levels of community
understanding about the issues and to empower people, both individually
and collectively, to make appropriate decisions for themselves. The philosopher
Ludwig Wittgenstein once wrote that the aim of philosophy is to `show the
fly the way out of the fly bottle'. The Commission should have a similar
aim - to empower people to feel first that they ought to be able to have
a judgement and second to have confidence in their own judgement.'
Fear of freedom?
  This does raise the question of whether people feel so incapacitated by
the rate of change that they actually prefer to have others make the
fundamental decisions for them. I suspect this is widespread and, as Eric
Fromm said, there is a `fear of freedom' because freedom means responsibility
and exercising judgment. But the 20th century feudalism - the urge to 
subordinate personal judgment to somebody else - is still a powerful
cultural and psychological factor, especially in the working class. But
to what extent is this fear imposed, or is it inherent?
  It will be argued with some justice, that as with public libraries, the
greatest users of the Commission will be those who need it least, that is
the people who have already begun to work out the implications for themselves,
while the most seriously alienated will remain out of reach. The Commission
will need to develop close working links with various `mediating structures'
- local government, the trade unions, parliament, the bureaucracy, churches,
journalists, welfare and voluntary organisations, members of political parties,
schools and TAFE, and with businesses as well to anticipate their clients' 
needs, provide materials as required and to act as a clearing house for 
information.
  The Commission will not be a planning body, attempting to make decisions
in science-related areas or to recommend policy: that is the task of the
government and relevant departments. Nevertheless the Commission will make
an indirect contribution through its publications. But the Commission will
attempt to act as a guide for the perplexed, to provide road maps or consumer
handbooks for those who want to work out where they are going and what to
do when they get there, or how to change directions and objectives.
  The Commission will not be into `futurology' and if its name suggests
that, this is regrettable; but there is no convenient alternative synonym
for `future'. It will not be into astrology or teacup reading either. But
it will be into options.
  As I will argue below, there are intractable problems in trying to predict
quite fundamental outcomes like the future size of the labour force due
to technological change. Will there be more jobs or less? I don't know and
I doubt if the Commission will either. What will the future jobs be? That
will depend on whether the trend lines of the past thirty years continue
or not, but continued growth of service jobs seems overwhelmingly likely.
The `human services' sector already employs as many people as manufacturing.
  However, the Commission ought to be encouraging debate about future options
such as:-
‚2 What are possible income/leisure/work trade-offs - and who makes the
decisions? 
‚2 Whether `disposable time' - that is not forced, unwelcome inactivity but
the capacity to choose freely how we live - is the true measure of wealth
and freedom or whether this concept threatens our traditional value systems
too deeply.
‚2 Whether we can `work less and live more', or whether the `work ethic' and
the habit or subordination is programmed into human nature and is both
psychologically and even physiologically necessary. Is the question of
alternative economic support central to this, or is it a side issue?
‚2 Whether there should be mass or individual solutions in scientific related
social areas. It is clear from some of the bitter attacks on the Commission
that many people feel threatened by the idea that long held value systems
may be questioned in debate. It may reflect too a prevailing anti-intellectual
phase in Australian public life.
  The Commission will not be pushing a line - but promoting discussion of
fundamental science-related issues so that citizens come to realise, perhaps
for the first time, that there are choices to be made about how we `live,
move and have our being'. The great flag debate, an area in which the
Commission will not be active, is an illustration of how people have been
disturbed by questioning something which was taken for granted for decades.
  Another priority of the Commission for the Future will be to raise levels
of community understanding in areas which are perceived to be enormously
threatening and alienating to many people, especially the unskilled. To
them science has the image of Dr. Strangelove - something that can threaten
make them feel that the world is controlled by forces well beyond their
comprehension. The age of science has also seen the revival of creationism,
astrology, tarot cards and superstition.
  The appalling violence at Milperra in 1984 and at the Heysel Stadium in
May 1985 should serve to remind us of the consequences of what frustration,
alienation and misdirected energy can wreak. The causes and results of violence
are subjects that we tend to look away from as a community. Technology-related
alienation may lead to the `fire next time': we should not rely on the excuse
that we have not been warned.
  There are no bodies in Australia directly addressing these problems -
although there are counterparts in other countries:
‚2 The US Congressional Clearinghouse on the Future;
‚2 The New Zealand Futures Trust;
‚2 The Science Council of Canada;
‚2 The GAMMA Institute of Montreal;
‚2 The Netherlands Scientific Council;
‚2 The Swedish Secretariat for Futures Studies.
Issues for all Australians.
  The following issues, all scientifically and technologically based, will
change the direction of our society radically but their importance is only
dimly recognised. If we do not evolve appropriate personal and community
responses, somebody else will impose them on us.
1. Australia as an `Information Society'
  The concept of a society/economy in which brain power replaces muscle
power/raw materials/energy as the major economic determinant still has a
shocking novelty to many people who should know better. Tell people that
more Australians are employed in the collection, processing and dissemination
of information broadly defined than in farming, mining, manufacturing and
construction combined and they just won't believe it - even though the figures
prove it.
  The significance of an `information economy' has taken a long time to
begin penetrating parts of the national consciousness and still has not
done so in the bureaucratic and political sectors, trades unions and employers.
Canada has devoted time and thought to its implications through its Science
Council and the GAMMA Institute and New Zealand's Commission for the Future
did good work on it.
  To many Australian decision-makers, `information' is simply equated with
hardware, computer capacity, and mere number crunching.
  The human and software implications have been totally ignored.
  So has the potential for a reconfiguration of political power. Is information
to be vertically integrated, controlled from the top and used to shore up
existing power structures? Or can there be a horizontal model - with democratic
access, strengthening the periphery relative to the centre, empowering the
individual against the mass organisation, the one against the many?
  This is a very dangerous question. When are we to begin debating it? This
is not an issue to which the Australian print media have devoted much space:
to the press the information revolution means news about the computer industry
and supplements promoting hardware.
  When the corpus of knowledge is doubling every few years, how can access
to decision-making power (=information) be shared around? Is it impossible?
Is it worth attempting?
  Jeremy Campbell's Grammatical Man (Pelican, 1984) is particularly valuable
on `information' as the central factor that links together computers,
biotechnology, language theory, evolution and philosophy.
  The Commission for the Future can play a vital role in the evolution of
a National Information Policy. Because of its broad social, educational
and economic implications both individually and nationally, encouraging
public debate on the implications of an information society - its benefits
and threats - must be the Commission's first priority.
2. Computers, robots numerically-controlled machines and education.
  What are the implications of developing an `Information Society' for
education? Should our schools be increasingly specialised, computer related
and science oriented? Or is this the time for greater emphasis on general
education, complementary to technology, aimed at promoting personal
development, including literacy and the arts? The question is absolutely
fundamental and must be addressed now. It is a subject of enormous concern
for parents. I find little evidence that it is being addressed. Michael
Kirby is one of the rare public figures to raise it. 
3. Artificial Intelligence (AI)
  Is AI a threat to natural intelligence? Will the sheer complexity of modern
science - and the difficulty of providing adequate or appropriate linkages
with the community at large - lead to the development of a technocracy
and rule by an elite? 


</sample>
