Paths to revitalising Australian industry By Senator John Button  

In 1984, the Australian economy was enjoying strong growth. Employment
was rising solidly. Inflation and interest rates were falling. Profits
were expanding. Business investment was showing improvement.
  Today, the scene is quite different. The world economy is undergoing
significant adjustment. Major trading nations blocs have reacted to their
domestic industry difficulties by mounting increased trade barriers and
other defensive strategies.
  The serious balance of payments position in which Australia now finds
itself draws attention to the long-term structural problems of the Australian
economy.
  Historically, Australia as a trading nation has relied on the agricultural
sector and more recently the mining sector as the basis of national wealth.
In 1986 we find ourselves with a hard pressed agricultural sector, and with
a mining sector, the products of which are subject to depressed international
commodity prices.
  The problems of some sectors of the rural industry are not short-term and
are not likely to be solved by short-term responses to vociferous demands. 
Basically, those longer-term problems stem from enormous changes in 
agricultural technology, resulting in increased crop yields and productivity 
generally, and consequent self-sufficiency and indeed surplus food supplies 
in many countries where it might never have been anticipated 10 or 15 years 
ago.
  Similarly, while the mining sector can be anticipated to be a strong
contributor to Australia's export performance for a number of years, structural
changes in economies, such as Japan; new and changed technologies; and
substitution of materials for existing commodities suggests caution in
over-optimistic predictions about too great a reliance on that sector in
the medium to long term.
  The fastest growing sector of world trade is in manufactured goods, and
that is the area in which technological innovation appears to be having
the greatest impact. Services are similarly a fast-growing sector of world
trade.
  In Australia, 20 per cent of our exports consist of so-called manufactured
goods and only ten per cent consist of elaborately transformed manufactures.
  There are, of course, obvious reasons for this, and there are obvious
consequences of that fact. This is well illustrated by the apparent slowness
of the Australian economy in responding to the marked devaluation of the
Australian dollar - the so-called `J curve' effect. A devaluation of this
order should undoubtedly place large sections of Australian industry in
a highly competitive position. Whether advantage can and will be taken of
that enhanced competitiveness depends on a great range of factors including
the structure of industry, traditional management attitudes and habits,
and the extent of imported inputs.
  Or, to make this point in a different way, the consequence of a marked
devaluation in an economy such as Sweden or Germany would be likely to
produce a fast J curve effect. In an economy such as Asutralia's, with current
world trading conditions in agricultural products and commodities, the effect
might have been assumed as predictably slow and relatively weak.

 The focus on industry  

In the circumstances - dramatically illustrated by recent events to which
I have referred - but which were nonetheless apparent well beforehand, it
is therefore not surprising that there has been an increased focus on
Australian industry.
  The manufacturing sector is important to any economy, despite the world-wide
decline in the proportion of people directly employed in the sector since
the 1960s.
  It provides a significant source of national wealth creation which can
finance both better living standards and greater investment for the future.
A strong manufacturing sector strengthens other sectors of the economy by
using inputs from the primary sector, requiring services for management
and production and by creating products which can be utilized, serviced or
complemented by the rest of the business sector. Both directly and indirectly
it provides a diversity of job-skill opportunities and has the capacity
to contribute to exports, the area where the greatest opportunities for
growth in demand now exist.
  In examining the topic Paths to Industry Revitalisation, I should refer
in passing to one path which we followed in the past and which still entertains
a nostalgic attraction for some.
  During the halcyon days in which we relied so heavily on agricultural
and commodity exports, the policy environment in which Australian
manufacturing industry developed was one of satisfying the domestic market
behind high protective barriers. This insulated this section of Australian
industry from world competitive pressures, from the changes which were taking
place in the world manufacturing economy and particularly from necessities
of good mangement, innovation, product development, research and development,
and attention to design quality and marketing skills.
  Most importantly, those years were characterised (particularly in the
1970s) by:
 ‚2 poor levels of investment,
 ‚2 a rapidly declining performance in research and development,
 ‚2 minimal concentration on sustained export activity and increasing
fragmentation of Australian industry - in each case in marked
contrast to trends in other countries.
  If that path had an attraction about it, perhaps it was that it was downhill
all the way, the legs felt good: the mind nurtured dangerous illusions.
  The policy environment was wrong, the incentives were wrong, the perspective
was wrong.

 Industry revitalisation  

Largely as a result industry revitalisation is a totally accepted and perceived
need in the 1980s and the path is uphill dealing with issues such as
investment, export orientation, R & D fragmentation. The issue is
muscle-building for the legs rather than relaxation - concentrating the
mind on realities and future goals rather than illusions.
  The role of government in the revitalisation of industry is only one part
in the tripartite drama involving also management and workers.
  The prime role of government in revitalisation is to provide an environment
within which industry can prosper and grow. Such an environment obviously
demands favourable macro-economic conditions and growth in demand.
  There are a multipicity of issues requiring attention including an
appreciation of the importance of inter-sectoral relationships in the
Australian economy. 
  But secondly there is a need to appreciate that the process of 
revitalisation is one which is not going to take place overnight. The 
important thing is to recognise that the steps on the path have to be
purposeful and in the right direction.

 A checklist for improvement  

Some of the issues which constitute a sort of checklist of matters which
have to be addressed in providing an environment for improved performance are:

 1. Investment  

Increased investment is an imperative of industry revitalisation. Whether
we attain that will be determined by anticipation of future profits which
is in turn by anticipation of future profits which is in turn determined
by a range of issues including taxation, continuity in the policy environment
and capacity for capital utilisation.

 2. Technology  

The capacity to have the best available technology will depend on investment
and the capacity to use it will depend on workforce skills, good management
and innovation.

 3. Exports  

Increased exports are not only a necessity in improving Australia's trading
position, they are for many industries a corollary of advanced technology
which enhances productive capacity in a small market such as Australia -
a market which, all other things being equal, has a limited absorption
capacity.

 4. Fragmentation  

A fragmented industry structure in a small market invites competition which
weakens rather than strengthens the base for exports.

 5. `Value-added'  

The pursuit of value-added in Australian industry is necessary. Firstly
in respect of those raw materials which we have traditionally exported and
new industrial materials, and secondly in those industries where we have
advantages in terms of particular expertise or potential for expertise
(processed minerals, optical fibres, biotechnology).
  These are some of the most important items on any such checklist, they
are clearly amongst the most crucial but there are many others including
a stable industrial relations environment, work force skills and increased
flexibility in accommodating structural change.
  These major issues are being addressed through a range of policies including
deregulation of the financial system, changes to taxation, agreement with
the states for abolition of state purchasing preferences, admission of foreign
banks, establishment of a venture capital market, and improving the R &
D incentives.
  In short, the environment in which business makes investment decisions.
  Structural adjustment policies have been introduced in to key industries
which have displayed the characteristics of industrial decline such as steel,
shipbuilding, motor vehicles and currently heavy engineering. Similar policies
have been pursued in sectors of primary industry.
  Positive forms of assistance are provided to encourage industries to look
for wider opportunities made available by expansion and a greater degree
of competitiveness, rather than have them concentrating on defending a declining
share of a restricted domestic market.
  An example of this is the move towards bounty assistance in some areas,
and away from an excessive reliance on negative measures such as tariff
protection, computers, robots and machine tools are examples of where this
more positive approach has been applied.
  Finally, a major question which affects revitalisation of Australian industry
is the need to bring about significant changes in attitudes within Australian
industry about a whole range of matters which influence success - quality,
design, marketing, delivery and cost control measures - most importantly
a positive approach to grasping opportunities.

 Developing a productive culture  

There is an even greater need to change community attitudes towards industry
to encourage a greater understanding of the importance to Australia's future
of developing a productive culture. As part of this important path to industry
revitalisation, the Australian government has chartered the Commission for
the Future to develop a strategically targetted community education program
to assist the development of a productive culture which encourages an
innovative, and forward thinking community.
  Generations of Australians have grown up as shop window voyeurs staring
goggle-eyed at the goodies imported from countries where cleverer people
have addressed with diligence the problems which we are confronting today.
Sustained by the everlasting mythology of the resource boom variety the
need to address these issues has received little broad community recognition.
  Changing those attitudes, that variety of cultural cringe, is not going
to be easy and the Commission for the Future has a large and significant
task. Having a productive culture means being in a community which ensures
that education and training in the work place, formal and informal education
sectors incorporates notions of productivity as fundamental to our community's
standard of living.

