Taking on economically rational man By Eve Smith  

BEING POOR IN AUSTRALIA ISN'T much fun: you don't starve, but you may go hungry
from time to time; you won't go naked, but the clothes you have will rarely be
what you would choose; you may live in a public housing estate in a fringe area
if you are lucky, but it is more likely that you will move through poor but
expensive private rental accommodation; you don't have outings and holidays,
and you often miss out on what other people around you take for granted. Poverty
is relative, but painful.
  For at least one in five children in Australia, the right to live in a rich
country is a very limited right. They are the new poor, the children of
pensioners and beneficiaries who seem to have lost their claim to a fair share
of Australia's ample resources. And it's the government that makes them poor
and, more importantly, keeps them poor.
  The social security system in Australia was developed to cope with an affluent
country and full employment. The only people seen to be in need of community
support were those who were prevented by age or infirmity from supporting
themselves in the workforce. Unemployment was a temporary condition. Married
women were kept by their husbands, children by their fathers. Widowhood was a
calamity which led the State to assume the role of husband and father to allow a
few deserving women to claim government support for their child rearing.
  The poverty inquiries of the 1960s and 70s identified aged people as the real
poor, and governments moved to correct this. Retirement income moved slowly from
means tested, narrowly targetted welfare to broader, adequate support for most,
with an assumption that in the fullness of time advanced age alone would entitle
someone to a pension. Both major political parties had a universal aged pension
as part of their platform. Reforms of the early '70s - introducing pension for the over 70s, removing the means test and easing the income test -
clearly signalled an intention to move from a `safety net' to a `retirement
entitlement'.
  These changes were argued on the grounds that the aged were entitled to a
reasonable living standard, and that one should not penalise those who had been
frugal by providing for themselves. David Ingles (AS, March 1986) has clearly
shown the demise of this concept, and its replacement by an income related
superannuation scheme. This works to the advantage of workers over those out of
the workforce, and of the higher paid over lower paid. Even in retirement
inequality will persist, and be officially encouraged!
  These changes bode ill for those whose poverty comes not from age, but from
the recession of the last decade, the restructure of the labour market and, as a
result, women's limited earning power. The new poor of the '80s are the victims
of the feminisation of poverty: those families where men are either not present
or can no longer provide for their families. In lone parent families, families
where neither parent can find work and those where a parent is incapacitated, the
children have become the new poor.
  Unfortunately, the capacity to help these families and children out of poverty
is likely to be inhibited by the increased conservatism of the body politic.
The last three years' changes in social expenditure policies indicate the strong
possibility that future changes will further trap the poor, albeit while perhaps
slightly improving the cash available to some.
  A series of somewhat tattered swallows are signalling a dry summer of welfare
changes: moves that deny the right of access to benefits and replace this with
an obligation to prove penury as the only basis for support from the public
purse. So far we have seen cost savings through the abolition of the universal
pension for those over 70s, the abolition of family allowances for full-time
students in post-school training, and the implementation and extension of the
income tested family allowance known as the family income supplement. In the
area of community services, a major change has occurred with the switch of child 
care funding emphasis from an operational subsidy to a fee relief system. Other
straws in the wind are the narrow escape from the re-introduction of university
fees on an income tested basis, and the often touted possibility of demolishing
the universal family allowance system.
  The only advantage that such systems have is that they reduce public
expenditure, and allow for tax reductions for high income earners. They do this
by imposing extremely high effective `tax rates' on the poor and those on the
edge of poverty, so that these pay for the benefits to the rich.
  In looking at the options that should be considered by the current review of
social security support for families with children, it is necessary to emphasise
a couple of little-known facts about the Australian economic system: the first
is that we are a comparatively low tax country, with a smallish public sector as
a proportion of gross domestic product compared with most of our OECD peers; the
second is that we are one of the few countries in the world that pays the bulk
of our social security payments from general revenue, rather than from social
insurance payments. Therefore the options of being mean or generous are an
integral part of government policy.

THERE ARE A COUPLE OF CHARACters around who I heard argue the issues of tax and
economic policy on radio recently. They are Economically Rational Man, known as
ERM for short, and Economically Viable Equity, known as EVE. Rather than the
intricacies of equations determining what the right answers are, it seems that
social security policies tend to reflect people's value positions. These two
represent the differing viewpoints.
  ERM is the character that most economic texts study. He believes that people
are narrowly self interested. They will select the option which immediately
maximises profit. His perception, like those fathers of the discipline of
political economy such as Malthus, Adam Smith and Co. is that personal profit
drives us all and therefore the market place is the arena for all transactions.
He has many friends in Canberra, on both sides of politics. They are determined
to chop government spending so that the entrepreneurs can be bribed to create
wealth.
  His views on reform are neatly encapsulated in a quote by Jim McClelland in a
recent article on the present Federal government in the Sydney Morning Herald (4
March): "The essence of conservative governments is the right of postponement of
social amelioration. Today is never the right time to improve the lot of the
masses. Today's problem is keeping the economy on an even keel so the conditions
will be created under which society can afford such improvement." Or, as it was
put more succinctly by the White Queen in Through the Looking Glass, "Jam
tomorrow" but never today.
  EVE has a somewhat more optimistic view of human society. She realises that an
assumption that we only do things for immediate financial gains doesn't hold for
the roles most women perform. They take the responsibility for children, the
infirm and the distressed because these people need care. If ERM's hypothesis
can be so easily refuted, it can't be held to be universal. She feels that
people are prepared to give up immediate benefits to themselves for the broader
good, and also to ensure their society is worth being part of. She thinks
unfettered markets, which have no human element, create social systems based on
fear and greed.
  She freely admits her antecedents are Godwin and Keynes and the architects of
the welfare state, who came out of the Depression with a commitment to
eradicating poverty. She still has the dreams of the '60s and '70s, and can't
see why these should be superseded by the nightmares of the last century! After
all, Malthus was wrong and the vice and greed of the masses has not brought us
undone.
  ERM's friends around the boardroom lunch table discuss the way that the tax
system is ruining their enterprises, making it unprofitable to make more money. 
They find it more profitable to move as corporate raiders on borrowed tax 
deductible funds, than put their capital into new enterprises. They mention to 
the PM that these government controls inhibit their ability to move money around, 
and gently threaten non-co-operation unless government spending is cut. ERM pops 
back to the office and studies briefs on ways that a family allowance cutback 
would reduce the deficit.
  EVE drops in on her friend down the road who has just seen a job advertised
for a nurse. She would love to go back to work as the marriage is a bit and money and outside interests would both help. She starts to count the
costs. On two salaries she will pay full price for day care for both the
children - about $9,000 per annum. They will lose the family income supplement,
the rental rebate, the secondary allowance and TEAS for the two older
stepchildren. She tots it up, adds the costs of going to work, the loss of the
dependent spouse rebate, and realises that the nursing job may actually leave
them no better off than existing on her husband's low single income. EVE checks
the calculations, they are right and watches her friend rage that her attempts
to lift the family from poverty are taxed inexorably away by the withdrawal of
piecemeal means tested allowances.
  Another friend living on the pension drops in and shows how she worked out
that a possible part time clerical job would cost her almost all her wages. Her
child care would be subsidised but the loss of pension and ancillary benefits
mean that 30 hours work would actually leave her with less that $20 per week
extra! Both women are trapped by a combination of the withdrawal of income
tested payments and the low wages most feminised jobs attract. Unfortunately EVE
hasn't access to the government, so she writes a letter to the paper which is
not published.
  ERM pursues his quest for cutting the welfare budget. He suggests that those
on pensions be denied access to TEAS; he also points out that some pensioners
earn their annual allowable income in a few weeks, and suggests that they be
penalised on a weekly basis on their income; he also supports the income testing
of family allowances, but writes a defence of the dependent spouse rebate as an
appropriate reward for men who need home-cooked meals. He also updates the brief
on the cuts to the highest income tax brackets, expected next year.
  He then goes home to his wife's ministrations, and works on his investment
portfolio. His tax relief on superannuation together with the non-taxable share
investments is making his retirement look a very attractive financial
proposition.
  EVE spends the day on the phone trying to find child care for a friend who has
been offered a place in the full time TAFE course, starting on Monday. The local
centres tell her that the minimum fees under the new system of subsidy would be
about $18 per week, because the centre's fees are over the federal limit. Katie
is in tears of rage because she can't afford that on the pension. 
 
THESE VIGNETTES ILLUSTRATE that the value positions and political access of the
groups concerned are more likely to affect the outcome of debates than any
rational economic argument. There is no doubt that the framework the government
has set, with promised tax cuts, restrictions on the size of the public sector
and the deficit, and the folk panic engendered around the supposed blow out in
welfare expenditure, are all likely to condemn the poor to further poverty.
  Yet a rational debate on the effectiveness and efficiency of the present
payment system should lead to the exploration of other options for changes to
the income security system. Irwin Garfinkel, a recent visitor to Australia from
the University of Wisconsin, has worked over the years on a proposal to
alleviate the problems of children dependent on welfare mothers.

