The Australian Democrats a feasible alternative?  

In December 1975 Malcolm Fraser and the Liberals crashed their way into
government. When Fraser announced his new ministry, Don Chipp, the MHR for
Hotham, was left out. Chipp had been a minister or shadow minister more
or less continuously since 1966. Following his rejection from the Fraser
ministry he became increasingly disenchanted with the Liberals, a feeling
that had been growing in him for some time.
  In March 1977 Don Chipp resigned from the Liberals. At the time he wanted
to make a complete break from politics. Following his resignation, however,
he was approached by many people who saw the opportunity to create a new
force in Australian politics. He attended a series of enthusiastic public
meetings which were filled with people who were dissatisfied with the two
major parties. They came from all sorts of backgrounds. They were fed up
with Fraser's autocratic brand of big-business conservatism and still had
bitter memories of Gough Whitlam's perceived uncontrolled style of sweeping
social change. Two of the most significant groups behind the people who
were calling for a new political option were the Australia Party and the
New Liberal Movement. From early in 1977 the two groups had had joint meetings
with a view to creating a new party. In May 1977 the Australian Democrats
were officially launched at a triumphant meeting in Melbourne.
  The philosophies and policies of the early Democrats were a little vague.
Their most clearly defined policy was that they would work towards the
protection and development of small business. The early Democrats also
emphasised a new type of political morality upon which would build their
party. All their elected members signed a pledge that they would never block
supply in the Senate. Everyone who belonged to the Democrats had an equal
say in policy formulation and in the election of office-bearers, and no
Democrat P.M. would be caucused into voting on legislation in a way with
which they did not personally agree.
  The Democrats were founded on a very genuine foundation of idealism: they
really wanted to provide a viable alternative that would inspire people.
  The Democrats are now nine years old. They now have 11 membes of various
parliaments including seven people who hold the balance of power in the
76-seat Senate.
  The last decade in Australian politics has been a time of volatility and
change. It saw the end of Australia's most colourful and progressive
government, under Gough Whitlam. It saw the Fraser Liberals gain the two
largest parliamentary majorities ever enjoyed by any government in Australia,
and it saw the Labor Party under Bob Hawke bounce back with a new cautious
and neo-conservative approach to governemnt. The two major parties are now
virtually identical on many significant issues, and there is increasing
evidence that John Howard will eventually be forced to drop his new dry
fundamentalist policies.
  Over the last decade the feelings of Australians towards their environment
and towards the future of the world generally has also changed. The 1983
election saw the single issue of saving the Franklin River emerging at the
ballot box as few single issues had ever done before. During the long campaign
for the 1984 federal election, the emergence of the Nuclear Disarmament
Party made nuclear disarmament a vital issue.
  Australia's first single-issue peace MP, Jo Vallentine, was elected to
the Senate in the 1984 election.
  The convergence of the two major political parties and the growth of broad
environmental and social awareness in Australia have completely changed
the political landscape for the Democrats. They can no longer stand halfway
between the major parties. In recent years they have increasingly pursued
the vote of people who care about our environment. Their 1984 election
advertising read similar to the cry of the European Greens with the slogan
"You can save the world".
  The Nuclear Disarmament Party scared the Democrats. For the first time
there was a very significant threat to their existence. Senator Chipp could
recognise the sincerity of people like Peter Garrett but still felt a deep
sense of betrayal and was suspicious of anyone who appeared sympathetic
to the fledgling movement. Jo Vallentine took a Senate seat from their party
secretary, Jack Evans.
  Many people in the peace movement claim that the Democrats took up the
peace issue only when they recognised its electoral popularity. This is
not really true. In his book Don Chipp, the Third Man (published in 1978)
Chipp recalls his disgust at the quality of the first uranium debate in
the House of Representatives at the time of the Fox inquiry in 1976. The
Democrats have been asking questions in the Senate about disarmament and
uranium mining since they first took up seats in that chamber.
  What is true is that the Democrats are not hugely interested in pushing
peace at a grassroots level, and their membership is generally ambivalent
about peace. In mid-1984 the Democrats held a referendum among their membership
about a proposed hardening of their peace policy. The referendum took place
at the time when the federal government was doing an about-face on its uranium
policy. Only 260 of the Democrats' approximately 2500 members returned
ballot-papers, and of them about 40 percent were opposed to a hardening
of the policy.
  Much of the suspicion about the Democrats flows from their image of being
a group of disillusioned Liberals'. Again this reputation isn't really deserved
although most Democrat MPs have a conservative background, including a few
who have been successful in small business. Only Senator Chipp has actually
been a long-standing member of the Liberal Party.
  Internally the Democrats are very much torn between their emphasis on
protecting small business and their emphasis on pushing general environmental
issues. Among the seven Democrat senators Don Chipp and Michael Maklin seem
to have a strong personal commitment to the environment. Senator Norm Sanders
as the Democrats' new spokesperson on peace and environment has brought
a new healthy and uncompromising voice to the green side of the party, which
the Democrats are slightly uncomfortable with.
  Most of the other party-senators seem to be most identified with the
safeguarding of small-business. Senator Dan Vigor has a background in computer
consultancy and Senator John Siddons is the son of the founder of the tool
manufacturer Siddons industries.
  For people who looking for a party that is totally committed to pushing
ecological and social issues, the Democrats' policy of being a watchdog
for small business makes them reserved about the major direction of the
party. The great difficulty for the Democrats is that there are only limited
ways they can make progress on ecological issues because generally government
policy on this type issue never has to be enshrined in legislation. But
many matters that affect small business do make their way into legislation,
such as tax-bills which the Democrats have the potential to alter through
holding the balance of power. This means the Democrats can point to many
tangible successes on small-business issues but to few if any on ecological
issues.
  There are two major ways the Democrats could make more progress on
environment-related issues. All of the Democrats could get into more grassroots
campaigning, not just questions in parliament and statements to the media,
and the Democrats could also use their balance of power more effectively
by trading support for certain bills which the coalition opposes in return
for better government decisions on the environment. The Democrats are not
keen on pursuing either path.
  The fact that the Democrats only have about 2500 members is evidence of
the fact that they do not seek a lot of non-voter institutional support.
Only Norm Sanders and Don Chipp really put a lot of time into things like
taking part in environment marches and public meetings.
  The Democrats are loath to use their balance of power in a radical way.
When the woodchip issue came up last year the Democrats were being asked
by the ALP to support an oil drilling bill which they had earlier rejected
but about which they did not particularly care. The Democrats
began to do some horsetrading, and the Labor Party said they would support
the bill in return for a good decision on woodchips. The Democrats decided
to support it and give away their bargaining power. Many of the Democrat
Senators were worried that it just wasn't proper to trade support across
issues. To many folk outside the Democrats, however, it seemed obvious that
some of the nation's most magnificent trees were more important than the
interests of oil companies. Horsetrading could get out of control and would
need to have sensitive parameters if it weren't to have a destabilising
effect, but the Democrats don't appear willing to explore trade-offs.
  Don Chipp, now 60, is the second-longest-serving member of federal
parliament. There is much speculation that he may soon step down as leader
of the Democrats and give the reins to Senator Janine Haines, the deputy
leader. If this happens the Democrats may retreat even further from being
a genuine green party.
  Janine Haines is 40. She entered the Senate in 1977 by filling a vacancy
left by Steele Hall, a former premier of South Australia. Hall is now a federal
Liberal backbencher on the west side. She was a key figure in the New Liberal
Movement. She has a keen interest in women's issues but does not have much
personal interest in peace and ecological issues. During last year's woodchip
campaign she said that she had no personal feeling about woodchipping but
went along with the party policy. If she were to become leader there is
no doubt that the Democrats would still get behind environmental issues
but Janine Haines would probably not have a lot of personal enthusiasm for
the green side of the Democrats.
  The Democrats do do some very important and useful things but they are
seen by an increasingly large number of people in alternative Australia
as lacking colour and a real determination to change people's awareness
about the direction in which this planet is heading. Their bitterness towards
the NDP did nothing to dispel their image as career-politicians. Only Senator
Sanders really stands outside the passive mould in which a lot of people
put the Democrats. There is no doubt that the Democrats genuinely want to
change the world: they are very sincere and caring people but their means
are often seen as being at odds with their ends.
  The distance between the Democrats and the more radical ecology groups
and the overall survival of the Democrats themselves will come to a head
at the next half-Senate election. The Democratic Labor Party and the Democrats
have both shown that there is room in the Senate for a third party but there
will continue to be intense competition over the next few years over who
that third party should be. 
  A half-Senate election is due by early 1988. At that election six Senate
seats in each state will fall vacant unless a double dissolution is called.
In late 1984 the federal government increased the number of Senate seats
for each state from 10 to 12 to keep the overall number of Senate seats
at roughly half the number of seats in the House of Representatives. It
has been claimed by some of the Democrats that this increase was a ploy to
squeeze out third parties because an even number of seats in each half-Senate
election means that there will be no leftover seats for a third party to
pick up. This is probably being paranoid; constitution demands that the
ratio be 1:2. The Democrats managed to pick up two seats in the 1977
half-Senate election and three seats in the 1980 half-Senate election when
there were only five seats available in each election. Six seats should
give them a better chance than before if they poll well. It is equally valid
to argue that six seats means there are now two leftover seats instead of
one. 
  To gain a seat at the next election, if a double dissolution is not called,
will require about 14.5 percent of the vote.  

