The "Queensland system: analysis and response" Dan O'Neill with Ross Fitzgerald
based on a talk by the former  

     If one thinks about what happens here in Queensland one quickly
becomes aware that although we are supposed to have a
Westminster system of government, in effect we don't. Some
people recently have been tempted to call the Queensland
system nascent fascism or to speak about the distinction
between personal and military dictatorships, thinking for
example of the Marcos regime as a personal dictatorship or of
the Chilean regime as a mixture of personal and military
dictatorship. People have begun to speak about Queensland in
this way with some justification.
     We have a system of government in  Queensland which nobody
has yet sufficiently analysed. There has not been  a
significant book or article analysing  how government actually
works in Queensland and why the system here significantly
differs from the rest of Australia. There are twelve
components of the situation that would need to be taken into
account in such an analysis. If one goes through these
components, each of them suggests a different way in which
there has been a growth in central power in the State. Put them
altogether and one has the makings of an analysis not just of a
personal rule that has broken decisively with democracy, but
of a system that is no longer democratic.

     These twelve dimensions are dialectically interrelated so
that the growth in dominance of one of them is linked all the
time to conditioning factors of the others that allow the
Queensland system to continue.

 1. Parliament and the power of Cabinet  

Firstly there is the phenomenon of parliament and the way it
works. While the underlying factor is the gerrymander and
malapportionment, if one looks at parliamentary procedure in
Queensland there is obviously no pretence of conventional
procedure in, for example joint party committees, the number of
parliamentary sittings and so on. Also the extremely powerful
Cabinet is not significantly related to the Parliament so much
as to other bodies that are rather more difficult to identify.
In particular it would seem the underlying structural
relationship is one of Cabinet to the mining industry. Although
Queensland is often looked upon as a State in the grip of the
rural back-blocks, one can analyse the whole phenomenon of
rural politics in Queensland as a kind of surface show that
has to go on in order that real power continues being co-
ordinated, not with the most rear-guard elements of Australian
capitalism, but with the most forward-looking elements of
transnational capitalism. The fractions of capital that really
have access to Queensland Cabinet are very cleverly disguised
by populism. However it is not just a disguise, because in
many ways populism really is believed in by those whom the
circumstances of power have thrown up as crucial spokesmen. It
is almost as if the Premier and other National Party `bucolic
types' have been sweated out by the pores of a complex
conjuncture of forces.

 2. The press  

An important dimension in Queensland requiring analysis is the
lack of responsibility of the press. It has been obvious since
the time of the dominance of the premier's influential media
adviser Alan Callaghan, "Mr X", that the local press has
gradually come to serve less and less the function of
ventilating a critical body of information and of leading
(rather than `merely reflecting') public opinion in Queensland.
Hence the famous Bjelke-Petersen quote about `feeding the
chooks'. By and large, with a few noble individual exceptions,
the Queensland press functions here at times almost like  a
kind of publicity agent or PR exercise for the government. It
certainly does not perform a very critical function. As a
consequence, Queensland Newspapers Pty Ltd (proprietors of The
Courier Mail, The Sunday Mail and the Telegraph) are in
considerable part responsible for the current political
situation.

 3. The demise of the Liberals  

This has been a long and complicated process but which now
looks as though it is fairly decisive. It is almost as if the
requirements of Queensland politics demand certain criteria
from Liberal party `leaders' at radical variance from those
usually connected with leadership. Moreover, because of the low
level of manufacturing in Queensland and the lack of an
important capital city there has never really been the economic
and demographic basis for a strong Liberal Party in Queensland.

 4.The demise of the ALP opposition  

It seems clear that the ALP over a number of years has not been
able to function as an effective opposition. In the main, the
party has been factious, male-dominated, anti-intellectual and
anti-principle. This is connected to the whole trend within the
ALP and its links to Australian capitalism, so that federally
the ALP seems to be orienting itself more and more towards
becoming an anti-ideological, `consensus' body like the
American Democrats.

 5.The reorganisation of the public service  

This is a complicated story because the facts are hard to fully
explicate. In Queensland the public service, instead of
functioning as a semi-independent body reflecting about the
long-term interests of the whole structure of civil society,
has become more and more instrumental over the last 15 to 20
years. At least three elements need to be examined: (a) the
growth in power of the Premiers Department which started off as
a fairly small department, but now engrosses more and more
power, (b) the establishment in 1971 of the Co-Ordinator
General's Department and (c) the establishment in 1974 of the
Priorities Review Committee. Through such bodies and through
the more recent filching away of the Treasury's functions from
the Liberal Party, and by connecting these with the dominance
of the Premier in the Cabinet, one gets powerful tools created
within the public service that can be geared into all these
other centralising elements.

 6. Control of the police  

This is an increasingly significant factor. Especially after
the struggle in 1976 between the police union and Ray Whitrod -
the `reforming' commissioner - the police have become more and
more of a para-military force in Queensland. It is indeed
fortunate that the Premier has not got the national power of
using the army. The more one examines how the police is used in
Queensland the more it seems to serve a function intermediate
between a police force like the London Police and the
military. (Elements of the judiciary in Queensland also give
the appearance of having been politicised.)

 7. Decline in power of the trade unions  

In the wake of the SEQEB issue and in the wake of recent and
impending anti-union legislation there is little need to
underline this fact. Because trade unions are changing
structurally in an even more dramatic way in Queensland than
in the rest of Australia and in other capitalist countries,
this throws up a different kind of leadership within
Queensland trade unions. Although many people would attack the
present leadership as though it was some sort of personal
deviation that leads to their not pushing industrial struggles
very hard, and not being as militant as traditional trade union
leadership, it makes more sense to take a structural analysis
and see the emergence of what could be called `9 to 5' trade
unionism in the Queensland leadership. This is another factor
which breaks all sorts of ideological and traditionary links
with the organised working class movement.

     While the above are seven `institutional factors,
there are five highly significant cultural factors that are
related to these factors.

 8. The rise of general influence of a extreme right-wing  

This right-wing, much in the style of American right-wingism,
has got access in a big way to the ear of Queensland ministers:
the Education Minister for example strongly believes in
creationism. Then there is the direct influence of Rona
Joyner's organisations, like STOP (the Society to Outlaw
Pornography) and CARE (the Committee Against Regressive
Education), and pressure groups like the Creation Science
Foundation, plus their powerful indirect influence through
media, schools and other state institutions.

 9. Continuing nullity of the liberal professions in Queensland  

At least since the nineteenth century, one phenomenon our Anglo-Saxon culture has been that throughout society the
professions have acted as an unofficial non-commissioned
officers rank of a more liberal and enlightened conception of
civil society. This is entirely lacking in Queensland.
Although perhaps not dramatically evident in places like
Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide, the professions there have not
yet severed their links as strongly as they
have in Queensland, with the traditions of scholarship and with
the general humane aims of the culture that has come down to
us from the Greeks and Romans. If one looks for the influence
in a supervisory way on the general process of society,
particularly of the legal profession in Queensland, where are
the great civil libertarian lawyers in Queensland, where is
the tradition of defence of the public interest? While one
expects even less from bodies representing doctors, dentists,
accountants and so on, in general the professions as a distinct
kind of estate within society have not shown much social
responsibility in Queensland.

 10. Linked to this there is the almost complete absence of  

Brisbane intellectual life. In other Australian cities there
is what might be called an urban intellectual machine which
functions in the society and which constitutes centres of
intellectual life outside the tertiary institutions. Over
many years in Queensland the centres of intellectual life have
only been the universities. However they have not fulfilled
that function very well. Within the academy it has been left to
significant minorities, particularly at times of upsurge like
the late 1960s and early 1970s; these minority groups have been
the real centres of intellectual life in Queensland society.

 11. Impotence of public opinion  

Apart from simply being the result of the above, hard work by
significant elites goes into making sure that public opinion
continues to be impotent. There is evidence that in a
calculated way things are done in such a style that possible
outcries are diminished. If one looks for example at the
timing of the significant destructions of public buildings in
Queensland there is evidence here of political will as well as
the general apathetic state of things.

 12. Apathy of the educational institutions  

From the middle of the Whitlam period, there has been a decline
in the function of the educational institutions as centres of
dissent and of intellectual conscience. While this is connected
with an international situation of capitalist recession, in
Queensland one can cite evidence of that actively being
fostered, not only by the recent attack on the student unions,
but by a creeping dominance of the State Government within the
educational sector. For example, it wasn't too long ago that
academics at Queensland universities were required to submit
reports on their study leave that would eventually wind up
being read by members of Cabinet. The disgraceful decision by
the University of Queensland in 1985 to award Sir Johannes
Bjelke-Petersen an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree is a powerful
symbol of the supine role of tertiary institutions in
Queensland (but see later).

     The consequences of these twelve dimensions which have
resulted in marked growth in central power in Queensland are
that many people feel a despair about possibilities of reform.
Thus the right to vote is experienced as nearly meaningless,
the right to strike has been taken away, and the right to
assembly is under continual threat. This, of course, is not a
new phenomenon. Errol O'Neill's April 1986 play `Popular Front'
dramatically analysed the present situation as having emerged
from the whole post-war period: it was a Labour Government
under `Ned' Hanlon that brought in the Act that is still used
as the main vehicle for barriers on the right of free speech
and assembly and the denial of other basic civil liberties.

     One upshot of this is the privatisation of resistance and eventually,
in many people, various forms of tuning out of whole areas of public life
- either going away physically to some place like New South Wales or Victoria
or South Australia or effectively going into a sort of psychic sleep or
into various illusions disguised as realism, including joining the ALP.

