Cultures and illiteracies  History? We're making it By Humphrey McQueen  

`CULTURES and illiteracies': both nouns in my title are
deliberately in the plural.
     By introducing terms such as `nouns' and `the plural' I
run the risk of joining those commentators who claim that
standards in our schools have fallen, and who demand a return
to the basics, to the three Rs and to grammar. In fact, they
have been arguing this for many years. As far back as 1920,
staff at the University of Queensland complained that students
could not write clear sentences; I have collected a file of
similar complaints spread over the sixty-five years since then.
     It is possible that there has been a persistent decline
in literacy and that the accusers have always been correct. Yet
a little historical knowledge suggests that the perception of
rising illiteracy could prove to be a research topic in its own
right. Instead of wondering why the middle classes were forever
rising, historians could ask why literacy is always declining.
     My worry is about a different kind of illiteracy, what I
shall refer to as `cultural illiteracy', which is far more
destructive and at least as prevalent as is grammatical
incompetence. Surely it matters less that children misspell
Shakespeare's name than that they are denied the chance to
revel in his plays. For as Ben Bowyang put it, "If R-O-N-G
don't spell wrong, what do it spell?"
     Everyone reading this piece will know the meaning of
`noun' and of `the plural'. If that was not so, I should be as
alarmed as Professors Kramer and Chipman. What is less certain
is whether readers will respond to the reverberations of
Matthew Arnold and his Culture and Anarchy in my title
`Cultures and Illiteracies'. How confident can we be that it
will continue to be possible to convey our comprehension of
Culture and Anarchy to teenagers, as readily as we can instill
them with the rudiments of grammar?
     I hold no brief for Matthew Arnold. Rather I want to
underline the importance that cross references play in every
understanding. Language is not a chain of inert blocks. Always
and everywhere, language overflows with metaphor, myths and
half remembered meanings. To be deaf to those echoes is to be
less than literate.
     As well as recalling the name of Matthew Arnold, my title
will have revived thoughts of C. P. Snow and F. R. Leavis
disputing `the two cultures', one scientific, the other humane.
Specifically, Snow lamented the illiteracy of arts graduates
who were pleased that they did not know the second law of
thermodynamics.
     The topic of scientific literacy is too vast to deal with,
and too important to pass over, so I will confine my remarks on
this matter to praise for one author and for one teacher.
     The author is Stephen Jay Gould, professor of biology,
paleontology and the history of science at Harvard. His best
known books are collections of the monthly essays which he
writes for Natural History. The epithet `natural historian' is
the one that suits him best. His essays revive the nineteenth
century manner of broaching some great question of existence
through the investigation of a particular phenomenon. One
collection draws its title from a study of the Panda's thumb.
Gould begins with a visit to the zoo to observe the Giant Panda
which the Chinese had just donated to the United States. Five
thousand words later he concludes with a disproof of the
existence by God by demolishing the argument from design.
     `Natural historian' has a fustiness about it and yet it
deserves to be treasured. Natural history offers a path between
the discipline of history and what is currently labelled
environmental studies. It also leads away from the shortcuts
associated with sociobiology.
     Another of Gould's books is relevant to my theme. In The
Mismeasure of Man, Gould cuts into the controversies
surrounding culture-free IQ testings. He argues that
intelligence is the capacity to operate in a culture. Cultural
illiteracy is alarming because it disables the intelligence,
dismembers the memory and disregards the imagination.

THE teacher whom I want to remember was a Mr Oliver who taught
me a good deal more than chemistry because he never confined
himself to the `periodic table'. In telling us how the world
worked, he always asked why any specific piece of knowledge had
been discovered. For instance, we learnt that in the presence
of a catalyst, hydrogen and nitrogen will combine under extreme
temperatures and pressure to form ammonia. This process was
named after a German scientist, Haber, Mr Oliver went on to
tell us. Haber had devised the catalyst in 1913, just in time
to let Germany go to war without needing to worry about being
cut off from the Chile saltpetre which it would otherwise have
required to make explosives. On looking back, I realise that my
Marxism and my interest in history both got more stimulus from
chemistry than from learning history itself, although religious
instruction was more formative than either history or
chemistry. We were denied the option of biology; if I had not
had other sources of information I would have left school in
the belief that the `sex act' had been passed by parliament.
     My final digression is towards `multiculturalism'. Again
there is no space to treat this in depth. While I am delighted
by the displacement of anglo-celtic dominance, I do worry when
ethnic groups are encouraged to preserve the cultures of
their places of origin. Apart from the perpetuating of
oppressive social practices that such preservation might
entail, there is the impossibility of treating culture as if it
were an object. Cultures are ever changing sets of practices
and to survive at all they must always be giving up and taking
in. Unless cultures are seen in that active way,
multiculturalism will be a pernicious nonsense. The definition
of cultures as ceaseless remaking is central; if culture is
identified with `artefacts' then it is impoverished and
illiteracy increases.
     Multiculturalism has highlighted one brand of illiteracy.
The writing of Australian history has been weakened by the
inability of most scholars to speak or read the languages of
non-English peoples. The Aborigines suffer most from our
illiteracy. Not only do we not attend to their languages but we
impose our concepts on their most crucial beliefs. The terms
`Dreaming' and `the Dreamtime' contain almost nothing of the
Aboriginal experience. Rather, they express our borrowing from
Freud, plus our inability to comprehend the intimacy of the
Aborigines' connections with the natural world. `Dream' is what
Europeans do when we are asleep. `Dreaming' is our wholly
misleading attempt to convey what Aborigines do when they are
most alert. Moreover, the term `the Aborigines' is a
simplification. If ever there was a polycultural world, it was
that of the tribal Aborigines.
     The Chinese and Pacific Islanders have had their
experiences ignored or distorted because their written sources
were closed to the bulk of academic historians. Similarly,
Greeks, Serbs, Italians and German settlers were often
marginalised by historians who tried to recount the practical
marginalisation of these groups without possessing their
languages. The 1934 disturbances in Kalgoorlie, for example,
were much more than race riots. Political divisions were at
least as important, as were disputes between Anglo-Saxons and
the `dagoes', who included left-wing Croats as well as pro-
Mussolini Italians. The Anglo-Saxons were split between
radicals who supported the Croats and the racist Australian
Workers Union who wanted all `wogs' off the goldfields.
     Countless stories will not be told for as long as
Australian history is monolingual. Language is the pivot of
every culture.

DIGRESSIONS, said Tristram Shandy, are of the essence, and so
I trust that this introduction has been sufficiently
digressive. If so, we are better equipped to ask how and why
the clock of cultural illiteracy has been overwound.
     Too often traditions are identified with what has already
happened. We fail to see that they too are living experiences,
constantly being reshaped even by those who approach them in
the spirit of pious emulation. To attend to traditions is not
merely to pay homage to the departed. It should be, as Eliot
observed, to recognise what is already alive.
     One of the most consistently engaging of historians, Eric
Hobsbawn, has co-edited a volume on The Invention of Tradition,
showing, for instance, that clan tartans were established only
in the 1840s and popular devotion to the British monarchy
after the 1870s. These essays have a double effect. They
undermine the power of those who want to deploy `ancient'
practices in order to sustain their contemporary rule Those
usurpers, the Shah of Iran and the Emperor of Abyssinia, 
attached themselves to royal households with a thousand years 
of lineage. More importantly, by indicating that many
`traditions' are of quite recent origin, we are reminded that
the social order changes, and that its traditions are invented
by people - in the case of clan tartans, by the needs of
woollen manufacturers.
     Another recurrent enemy of cultural literacy is the cult
of self-expression which has devastated the visual arts and
poetry. One teacher recently reported that a very bright
student of creative writing refused to believe that Tennyson
deliberately wrote in iambic pentameters Surely,
the student pleaded, those measures flowed naturally from his
essential being, arriving on the blank page to stand forever
uncorrected? As her teacher added, there comes a moment when
students bent on self-expression have to be told that what is
wrong with their work is that they are boring. The way to
escape from the tedium of ourselves is to steep our souls in
life, and in what has gone before us. Traditions, then, help to
set us free by encouraging us to add to them, and thus to
redirect them.
     Australians face a further illiteracy because our cultural
systems have been dominated by British and later by US
organisations. The British garrison of professors, bishops,
school principals and editors is no longer self-perpetuating,
though its remittance men and pensioners still encumber a
disproportionate percentage of our cultural offices, as do
second and third rate North American doctorates in the social
sciences. At the commercial level, there has been the control
of book publishing, film distribution and television
programming by British and US corporations. The cumulative
effect of this occupation has been to stifle both critical and
creative work about Australia.
     There has been a significant lessening of this overseas
domination during the past fifteen years. None the less, a
colonised mentality survives. Australian literature continues
to struggle for its life within the English Department at the
so-called Australian National University. Basic facts about
Australian culture are far from being common property. One
journalist reported a lecture on `The Antipodean Manifesto';
another transcribed the Jindyworobaks as Virginia Warradaks.
     Substantial problems arose when each generation of
Australians tried to write, paint, sculpt, make music and
produce films in ignorance of what had been attempted or
achieved. That ignorance left them open to overseas models and
it debilitated their confidence. Writing and painting did best
because, from the 1890s, there were the traditions of Streeton
and Lawson to follow, to reject and to incorporate. Few of the
film makers who started around 1969 had seen much work by
Longford, Hurley or Hall, let alone heard of the McDonagh
sisters. Today, films and television series are supplying the
stories about our past that the formal educational system has
failed to convey.
     The visual historian, Ernst Gombrich, has lamented the
decline in `the tradition of general knowledge'. He observed
that general knowledge had had its snobbish edge, that the
matching of Greek dramatists with their plays was one way of
excluding people from conversations. The other side of general
knowledge was that it made children aware that there were
innumerable civilisations and zones for them to
explore. A single question and answer could momentarily
illumine the mind to the existence of Toltec society. General knowledge
tests quickened curiosity for more than this or that name, date and place.

