Poverty: Australian style By Graham Hill  

  Australian society is not egalitarian. There are inequitable disparities
in wealth and opportunity. It is estimated that the richest 2,500 Australians
own as much as the poorest 2 1/2 million, and that the top 5 per cent of
Australians own one half of the nations's personal wealth.

  Australian affluence contrasts with Australian indigence. There are at
least 2 1/2 million people living in poverty in Australia. One in six
households are struggling to cope with a below poverty line income. A 1982
survey conducted by the Australian Council of Social Services of low income
families showed that they often missed meals and had inadequate diets, the
children skipped days at school because of lack of clothes, and they relied
on charities and emergency aid for day to day expenses.
  The Victorian Emergency Relief Committee has admitted that every day
more than 1,000 Victorians approach them to beg for emergency food, clothing
and furniture. 
  The waiting lists for public housing are now longer than after World War
2, one quarter of the nation's youth are unemployed and the number of children
living in poverty is moving towards one million.
  It is a continuing disgrace that eleven years after the Henderson Inquiry
into Poverty, many more people have been allowed to slide into the mire
of impecuniosity. Since 1975, the number of Australians living in poverty
has more than doubled.

 Who and Why?  

The face of poverty has changed dramatically since the Henderson Report
of 1975. Family poverty and long term unemployment have now taken over
from the poverty of the aged as the focal issue. Bishop Peter Hollingworth,
Executive Director of the Brotherhood of St. Laurence, recently wrote that
`The easiest path to poverty these days is to have a couple of kids, get
retrenched or separate from your spouse. It is almost inevitable.'
  Single parents and their children comprise the largest component of the
poverty statistics. The NSW Council of Social Service estimates that
parenthood means poverty for 250,000 sole parents on pensions or benefits
and nearly 800,000 children. Over 90 per cent of supporting parents are women 
and 85 per cent of this group are dependent on social security incomes.
  Since their introduction in 1976, Family Allowances have declined in real
value by 23 per cent, representing a substantial loss to the disposable
incomes of all families with children. The overall value of child related
benefits has been eroded 22.4 per cent by inflation over the last decade,
leaving low income families reliant on social security, to fall further
behind.
  Single parents receive the family income supplement and a childrens allowance
of $16 per week which purports to cover the costs of housing, feeding and
clothing a child, but spent on food alone this benefit allows a mere 77c
per meal. It is ironic that foster parents receive a larger allowance of
$25 to $30 a week.
  Another group suffering poverty in substantial numbers are aged pensioners.
It is not difficult to understand why when it is remembered that the $102.00
weekly pension is used by many of our less fortunate senior citizens to
pay rent, leaving only negligible amounts for food, clothing, heating and
transport.
  Government statistics show 575,000 Australians are registered unemployed.
These same figures reveal that a third of the unemployed have been out of
work for more than a year, and more than half of these are still jobless
after two years.
  Unemployment benefits and entitlements were originally designed only for
temporary relief, and so are well below pension levels, causing the poverty
of our long-term unemployed to be particularly severe.
  Professor Ronald Henderson initially defined the poverty line as being
the situation when a take-home pay for a wage-earner with a dependent spouse
and two children, is lower than the minimum wage plus child endowment.
  Two years ago only an unemployed, childless married couple would have
received a sufficient pension to escape Professor Henderson's definition
of poverty. Currently there is no category of welfare receipient enjoying
a level of economic welfare that is acceptable by community standards.

 Welfare Reforms  

Single mothers so often find themselves among the ranks of the poor because
the scarcity of affordable childcare facilities precludes their entry into
the workforce. Whilst women's labour force participation is a crucial factor
in alleviating poverty in low income families, it assumes monumental
importance for struggling single parent families. An increase in community
funds allocated to improving and extending access to childcare would be
a major step in escalating the assault on poverty.
  As a matter of human decency all child-related welfare payments need to
be indexed to movements in the consumer price index.
  Another positive step in the battle against Australian poverty would be
for the Federal Government to means test family allowances enabling the
saved dollars to be redistributed to low income families.
  Acting upon the recommendations of the Henderson Poverty Inquiry in 1976,
the Fraser Government introduced family allowances in order to ensure that
the tax transfer system achieved some equity in distinguishing between
those with, and those without children. The family allowance represented
an acknowledgement by the government that regardless of income, those with
children incur greater expense than those without. Whilst this ideal is
conceptually true, the fiscal austerity of 1986 demands that family allowances
be means tested so that the limited dollars available can be targeted to
those who need them most.
  Last year $1.3 billion of the welfare budget was wasted on the dependent
spouse rebate. The yearly dependent spouse rebate is allowed to married
taxpayers supporting a dependent spouse and is valued at $1,030 for those
with children, and $830 for those without.
  Since higher income earners tend to be more able to afford the luxury
of a dependent spouse than less affluent couples, the rebate has served
to redistribute tax revenue away from those in greatest need. The dependent
spouse rebate should be phased out and replaced by a means-tested payment
made directly to the spouse.
  Social Welfare is more effectively allocated through direct payments
rather than tax concessions. A cash payment enables the government to ration
scarce welfare resources more fairly whilst ensuring that the target group
actually receives the benefit. The revenue saved by abolishing the dependent
spouse rebate would be better directed to poor families with children and
those couples who suffer poverty as a result of one partner's unemployment.
  One of many meritorious proposals from the Australian Council of Social
Service has been the suggestion to create a childrens allowance. This plan
would rationalise Government payments to families by combining the family
allowance, dependent spouse rebate, supplementary allowance for children,
family income supplement, the secondary allowance scheme and other minor
complementary schemes to form a childrens allowance of between $30-$40 weekly.
  The allowance would be paid to families that had successfully undergone
a means test based on the principal income coming to the household. It is
fairer to means test on principal family income rather than total family
earnings because the latter would create a `poverty trap' by discouraging
wives from supplementing the family finances by taking employment. The
proposal suggests that the allowance be paid at an equal level for each
dependent child under 16 years of age.
  The term `poverty trap' describes the predicament caused by a combination
of means-tested social welfare and high marginal tax rates that leave welfare
recipients financially disadvantaged if they attempt to find employment.
Those pensioners and unemployed gaining part-time work to supplement their
below poverty line incomes, find themselves facing a marginal tax rate of
50 per cent, as every dollar earned over $40 per week reduces their pension
by 50c. To this cost disincentive must be added other work expenses such
as new clothing, transport, childcare and the loss of pensioner concessions
including the healthcard for beneficiaries. For many social security
recipients employment is simply not worthwhile.
  The most obvious way to overcome this problem is to raise the allowable
income for pensioners and beneficiaries. This reform should complement,
rather than be used as a substitute for the ALP's pre-election commitment
to lift the basic pension rate to 25 per cent of average weekly earnings.
 
 Economic Recovery  

There is little doubt that Australian poverty would be substantially reduced
if the policy prescriptions outlined in preceding paragraphs were co-ordinated
into a comprehensive anti-poverty programme involving increased expenditure
and rationalisation of the social security system. Although social welfare
reforms are a crucial factor in providing short-term relief to the privations
of being poor, the role of economic growth in generating employment
opportunities to permanently eliminate poverty, should not be overlooked.
  Welfare lobby groups tend to dismiss the benefits of economic growth because
of the past three years experience combining unprecedented rates of growth
with increasing hardship for the poor. Many welfare advocates believe that
the tidal wave of economic recovery will ultimately pass still leaving
abyssal chasms of poverty in its wake.
  This dismal view ignores the lessons of economic history and contradicts
international experience where growth and recovery have provided jobs
for the unemployed, lifted real wages, and towed the poor into the ranks
of the middle class. If Australia could consistently maintain an annual
economic growth rate of 5 per cent, the nation would double its total output
(GDP) every 14 years and banish unemployment to the history books. The
associated increase in real income would augment Treasury coffers enabling
the government to raise pensions to a standard of decency well above the
poverty line.
  A further motive for aiming to achieve economic recovery and abundant
job opportunities is linked to the increasing budgetary strain of welfare
payments. On current trends our welfare system could collapse sometime
in the 1990s. The booklet entitled `Welfare Forecasts 1985-2000' estimates
that by the end of the century as many as 3.5 million Australians could
be dependent on some form of social security benefit. Over the past ten
years the cost of providing single parent pensions has increased from $127.2
million to $1.21 billion. Concurrently, Australia's ageing population
increasingly strains our welfare system as the ratio of taxpayers to pensioner
deteriorates. The number of aged pensioners is expected to rise 1.2 per cent
over the next twelve months to total 1.372 million recipients. 
  Almost everyone would agree that the pension is insufficient financial
remuneration for our senior citizens to enjoy security, dignity and
independence in their retirement, yet a mere $1 per week increase saps
the Federal Budget by $150 million. Similarly, in fulfulling its pre-election
commitment to raise pensions to 25 per cent of average weekly earnings,
the Government will need to find an extra $1 billion.
  If these tasks of fiscal management appear difficult now, our greying
population will make them near insurmountable problems in twenty years.
Compare the 22.2 per cent of GDP currently devoted to welfare spending with
research undertaken by the Anglican Mission of St. James and St. John
estimating that to maintain government benefits and social security at present
levels by the year 2000 will require a welfare commitment of 35 per cent
of gross domestic product!
  This frightening scenario depicts Australia floundeing into the next
century with a punishingly expensive welfare system providing inadequate
support for millions of below poverty-line recipients. The importance of
job creation and full employment in averting this predicament cannot be
overemphasised.
  The path of economic recovery is the only route for us to traverse if
our aim is the permanent elimination of poverty. Since it is the poor who
invariably suffer the most during economic downturns, a government that
did not pursue policies designed to promote recovery could not claim to
be waging a war against poverty.
 
 A Social Priority  

The Australian nation should regard the elimination of poverty as its foremost
social challenge. Economic growth aspiring to full employment is the currently
adopted long term approach, but in the interim decade the fate of 2 1/2
million needy Australians hinges upon community acceptance of the humanitarian
ideals in the provision of welfare.
  The looming danger is that the economic divisions within our society will
become permanently entrenched as they have in those overseas nations where
conspicuous materialism exists in vulgar contrast to squalor and deprivation.

