Demons of the New Right  The fearsome pupdawk By Hal Colebatch  

THE NEO-CONSERVATIVES, the dries, the New Right, call them what you will
(though in fact the three terms mean quite different things to those who
care about correct usage), have been making themselves unpopular with a
couple of our leaders lately. They were attacked firstly by Liberal Senator
Chris Puplick in an address to the 18th Young Liberal National Convention
on 9th January this year, and by the Leftist Labor Minister John Dawkins,
in a speech at the presentation of awards to the doubtless very meaningful
International Youth Year's probably equally meaningful "Australian Young
Writers' project" on January 26 (Australia Day, as it happens).
  As anyone acquainted with the styles and mental attitudes of the two
statesmen would guess, Senator Puplick's contribution was more generally
palatable than that of Mr Dawkins (not necessarily, I fear, very extravagant
praise). Senator Publick's sallies issued forth from the great, wet, throbbing
heart of neo-Gladstonian liberalism, while Mr Dawkins' more strident
pronouncements had a decidedly twentieth-century ring about them, with echoes
of gramophones not too far in the distance. As appropriate for one who is
reported to have described his recreation as "hating Liberals", Mr Dawkins'
speech dripped with self-righteous hatred. Senator Puplick's, on the other
hand, merely dripped.
  The two speeches were, however, similar enough in content for remark.
Bernard Shaw once identified the Chesterbelloc. Have we here found some
antipodean, bunyipish, creature called a Pupdawk? (I imagine it as hybrid:
a kind of fat, damp puppy, incongruously joined to a scrawny, vulture-like
neck, topped by a beak squawking for food - what food, we can guess - and
gawking with small, beady eyes at real and imagined enemies. Its nest, or
burrow, is, of course, the State).
  Well, not really. There are differences. But a set of common preoccupations
can be identified. Senator Puplick's speech contains a lot one cannot disagree
with. "As a party we (Liberals) enter 1986 apparently buffetted on many
sides. Our electoral fortunes have not been high recently; the political
initiative does not appear to be with us," he begins, presumably for the
benefit of any Young Liberal who hadn't noticed. Certainly no-one could
have disagreed with that at the time. He continues:
   Daily, the so-called gurus of the New Right, the Hugh Morgans and his
   female Doppelganger, failed Liberal Advisor Katherine (sic) West, berate
   us for failing to adhere to their visions of Australia's future, developed
   behind the protected walls of subsidised industry and cloistered academic
   tenure.
  This is a little odder. Hugh Morgan and Katherine West are not
interchangeable in argument or point of view. Hugh Morgan's industry was
not particularly protected, and though I am open to correction here, I
understand Katharine West is not tenured.
  After, as far as one can gather, attributing victory in the First World
War to the ANZACS:
   The set-back at Gallipoli marked not the end of an engagement but the
   birth through fire of a new, bolder, more confident spirit, one which
   was to lead to eventual victory in that conflict and to victories in
   many subsequent battles ...
I would have thought the entry of the Americans into the war, the British
and French efforts, and the losses sustained in Ludendorf's final offensive
had something to do with it, but perhaps I should be wary of disagreeing
on such matters with one who, in the same speech describes himself as "an
historian by training"), Senator Puplick continues that "Certainty and unity
of purpose must be our touchstones".
  Even, one wonders, at the risk of being wrong? "What I want," Senator
Puplick continues,
   is to get back to ... genuinely liberal basics and cut out a lot of the
   dry rot with which we have become infected of late. Above all, I wan   to restate and revitalise in contemporary terms the essentials of Menzian
   liberalism.
If Senator Puplick is going to use naughty phrases like "dry-rot", as a
sally, however silly, against the so-called "dries", he should be made aware
of what he is doing. He is, in fact, playing what might be a very harmful
game. To bracket the "dries", that is, broadly speaking, a group of economists,
political commentators and politicians who believe that it is important
to make politically unpopular economic decisions for the long-term benefit
(or rescuing) of the Australian community, with the "New Right" is simply
wrong. 
  Furthermore, and as it should not be necessary to tell a politician of
Senator Puplick's experience, to toss around terms like "New Right" really
benefits no-one but the Left, as the Left is very well aware. There is no
doubt that today the members of the political and cultural Left, with the
very considerable resources at their disposal, are embarking on a deliberate
and strategic campaign to categorise, and thereby damn, all opposition as
the "New Right", or some such closely-related term, dragging in spurious
fascist and other undemocratic associations. I have a draft paper by a leading
Left-wing academic which goes into some details of the strategy for bringing
this about.
  Senator Puplick really should realise what is going on in Australia at
the moment. It is becoming a new, and in many ways a nasty place, and it
is probably time that Liberals stopped their squabbling and pointless claims
about who are the true heirs of Menzies - who retired from politics before
many of the present generation of Young Liberals were born.
  However, he quotes, as an essential of Menzian liberalism, a speech from
the great man to the 1964 Federal Council (other factions can - and do -
claim other fragments from The Works as supporting their position. In a
party not notable for its religiosity, it all has an amusingly hagiological
air): "We have no doctrinaire political philosophy." (Indeed, indeed. By
about 1982 the Liberal Party's worst enemy could hardly have accused it
of having a doctrinaire political philosophy, or perhaps of having a political
philosophy at all.) "Where government action or control has seemed to us
to be the best answer to a practical problem, we have adopted that answer".
(Indeed this is also true. The Telecom monopoly, the postal monopoly,
loss-making government shipping and railways, the two-airline monopoly,
statutory marketing boards, tariffs, tens of thousands of regulations and
an ossified, legislation-guarded and now utterly inappropriate and destructive
wage-fixing system, all owe either their origins or their
all-too-long-continued survival to various Liberal governments' action or
inaction.)
  Senator Puplick describes in Standard Austrobabble various things which
must not be privatised as serving "vital social functions in maintaining
the unity and integrity of Australia as one nation where services ought
to be available, even if they have to be subsidised...", meaning, apparently,
"transport, communications and banking".
  In this quasi-mystical evocation of Australian unity, the Puplick approach
is not too dissimilar from the Dawkins one. Dawkins, however, is more deeply
and stridently in the traditions of Nationalist and Socialist mysticism.
"Roads, railways, airlines, telephones, mail, electricity, water supply,
hospitals," he declaims, "without them there would not be a nation, and
they have been provided and maintained by the collective will of the people!"
(Emphasis added.) Dawkins continues, as evidence of the evil of privatisation,
that
   Australia Post has been turned around from a loss of $65 million in 73/74
   to an operating surplus of $32 million last year. In 9 of the past 10
   years it has met all its operating costs and internally generated funds
   for half its capital expenditure.
He does not elaborate that Australia Post has achieved this remarkable feat
by the simple monopolist method of increasing prices at about twice the
rate of inflation and cutting services: in ten years the cost of an ordinary
letter went from 7 cents to 33 cents (soon to be increased to 36 cents),
while mail deliveries have gone from 11 per week to 5. Similarly he describes
Telecom as "self-financing".
  Since Telecom's government-enforced monopoly enables it to make a profit
of about $1 billion a year on trunk-calls alone, it is self-financing indeed.
Neither Mr Dawkins nor Senator Puplick seems aware that Canada's
privately-owned telephone system provides a similarly dispersed population
with a service that was about 20 per cent cheaper than Telecom's in 1983.
But we shall return to Mr Dawkins later.
  Senator Puplick defends the Telecom monopoly not with assertions about
the economics of the issues (which despite copious literature available
and the services of their own research staff and the Parliamentary Library
neither seems much acquainted with), but rather emits a cloud of gentle
Austrobabble about their unity and integrity and
   ... Our fellow Australians who live in remote parts of this continent
   where they provide the backbone of our economy, produce the bulk of our
   exports and contribute to the standard of living of we comfortable city
   folk are entitled to our support and are entitled to access to decent
   facilities ...
(But why not give this support through, for example, tax-relief rather than
hidden cross-subsidies?)
  Senator Puplick then moves on to attack "another modern shibboleth, the
`small government' fetish". There needs to be, he says, "more law, not less".
He wants law to protect the workers at Mudginberri and Dollar Sweets, to
protect small businesses from monopolies (but not, presumably, government
communications and transport monopolies, which maintain the unity and integrity
of Australia), laws to protect battered and abused "kids" (a matter for
prosecutions brought by the RSPCA, one would have imagined and
laws to keep drunks off the roads and drug pedlars off the streets. (It
is, however, arguable that in all these areas laws already exist but are
not always properly applied.)
  He also wants laws to prevent the uncontrolled seizure of private property
by the State (which could be better done by removing legislation which gives
the State such rights) and, most oddly: "If we want to protect our privacy
from ID cards and the like we will need more laws not less." (Why not protect
our privacy from ID cards simply by not having them - or anything like them?
I understand Senator Puplick, very commendably, voted against compulsory
Identification Cards on the Parliamentary Committee investigating the matter,
and one hopes that he will not be advocating a consolation prize for Big
Brother such as that which has been suggested of computerising with a common
data base, all State birth, death and marriage records.) "And do you say
then," he continues, "that smaller government is the answer to all our ills?"
(Apart from the fact that he seems to have confused small government with
ineffective or undirected government, as many Liberals have before him,
I would say that it is probably the answer to a great many of them.)
  Like Mr Dawkins, he takes the case he sees against the dries and/or the
New Right to absurdly reductivist terms: those who want smaller government
lack compassion; unlike Menzies they do not wish to protect the poor and
weak. He is sure that in today's climate some of his parliamentary colleagues
would have abused the Good Samaritan in the Gospel of Luke as a "Tory
interventionist". 
  Actually a desire to reduce the role of government in the economy and
human affairs does not always equate with a desire to see people die in
gutters. It may be argued that such an outcome is likely to be a result
of more government intervention, more economic rigidity and more Etatism
rather than less.(Such has been the case in New York, where government
intervention in rent-fixing has ended the building of cheap rental
accommodation, causing a population explosion of homeless people who really,
literally, do die in gutters, and in Africa where government price-fixing
has destroyed agriculture, etc., etc.) And who seriously believes that any
future Australian governing party would really abolish social welfare?
  It would be tedious, as well as distasteful, to go through the whole of
Mr Dawkins' speech, with its gamut of shrill and predictable demonologising
and hatreds. Here is a small but adequate sample of the full, rich (or rather,
poor) nutty flavour from near the bottom of page 3:

