Computers let the camera lie By Frank Walker  

THE old adage that the camera never lies has never really been true. Various
techniques from throwing Frisbees across the sky to look like UFOs, to
superimposing negatives, have long put a lie to that.
  But the electronic age has made reality redundant. From now on we are
going to have to doubt everything we see on film and on photographs.
  A new generation of computers has emerged that can change photographs
so that it is extremely difficult to tell them from the real thing. Until
now photographs have been changed by superimposing negatives, cropping,
cutting and pasting, or painting directly on to the print.
  The new computers take an image of the print, convert it into digital
data, and put it on a screen. The artist can then move the images around,
changing colours and making people or objects disappear and reappear at
will.
  When the artist is finished, the image is put back into the computer and
a print comes out at the other end of the process.
  The pictures shown here were done on two devices: the $200,000 British-made
Quantel Video Paintbox used mainly for fashioning television logos, and
the $2-million Crosfield Electronics pagination system also from Britain.
  Both have been in Australia for 18 months or so, but the operators are
still finding new ways of using the equipment, testing the boundaries of
what is possible. Colours of houses, dresses, and eyes can be changed at
will. Wrinkles, fat, or blemishes can be wiped away from film stars at a
flick.
  One operator, who did not want to be named, said a car company last year,
for an advertisement, wanted to use a spectacular photo it saw in a European
book of a rally car going around a mountain road. Unfortunately the car
was not their make.
  The operator said it used the machine to "paint" in the characteristics
of the wanted car over the image of the original. To cover over problem
areas, dust and flying stones from the wheels were added. A group of people
were standing too far away so the machine simply moved them closer.
  "You should never believe anything you see any more," said Terry Fitzell,
an operator on the Crosfield system at Mansfield Reproductions in Sydney.
"Even publicity photos of movie and TV stars come to us with bloodshot eyes
and pimples. We remove them with the machine. One of the worst examples
we get is the Queen Mother. She has terrible brown teeth. We paint them
white so no one can see."
  For a cigarette advertisement a parachutist jumped out of a plane with
the brand name on the top of the parachute and the photographer snapped
away from the plane as he drifted down on a blue lagoon with a sandy beach.
But the parachutist was in the top right corner of the picture, exactly
where the advertiser wanted to run words.
  Using the Crosfield, the operator shifted the parachutist to the bottom
left corner and doubled his size for good measure. "It saved them about
$30,000 as they didn't have to re-shoot the ad. Mind you, we could have
done it on the machine without them flying to the lagoon in the first place,"
said the operator.
  The Quantel Video Paintbox is a smaller machine used mainly for video
advertising and television logos. For moving pictures the artist has to
retouch every frame of the sequence.
  According to the marketing director of Quantel in Australia, Haydn Deere,
the potential of the machine is limited only to the expertise of the artist
working it. He admits the potential of the machine is "frightening".
  "You can really kiss good-bye to photos as evidence of anything. I have
seen whole battle sequences put on film that never happened. In one
demonstration, they had the image of a tank, put it on a background, and
frame by frame made it move across the screen. It was only when the turret
moved that it looked artificial, but that is only limited by the talent
of the artist."
  In a TV advertisement that would be shown in America, a Hawaiian beach
scene inadvertently had a topless woman bather revealing all. No problem
for the Paintbox. Frame by frame, they painted a bikini on her. The only
question was what colour they wanted.
  Deere is aware there is a strong ethical question involved in these machines,
but he says that is up to the people who use them.
  There are 10 Video Paintboxes in Australia, seven of them in television
stations. Sometimes they are not used just for station logos. One artist
who used to work for Channel Nine said the face of a mountain was moved
slightly on the Paintbox for a short sequence in a mountaineering documentary
so that it was clearer what the climber was doing.
  The Video Paint Brush Company does contract work on its Paintboxes in
Sydney and Melbourne. "Six months is a long time in this business. We are
doing things we wouldn't have thought of a year ago, and who knows what
we will be doing in a year," says Sydney manager Stephen Smith.
  The senior designer, Michael Murray, is an artist by trade. He said he
could not only change the colour of people's eyes on the machine, he could
make them blink.
  In 10 minutes of playing around on the machine, he gave Neville Wran a
beard and made Bob Hawke bald, simply by shifting portions of Wran's sideburns
over his cheeks and gradually extending Hawke's forehead.
  It would be difficult to pick it as a forgery as actual parts of the
photograph as recorded on the computer were moved rather than painting on
the beard or forehead. The only way to tell is to pick repetitions of the
"cloning" patterns of the parts of the photograph.
  The Paintbox and the Crosfield are only two of the new machines in the
rapidly developing field of digital retouching. The Israeli-made Scitex
machine and the West German Chromacom, for instance, also turn photographs
into computer data for printing, making photo and graphic reproduction quicker
and cheaper.
  The benefits of the new technology are obvious. They are opening up new
and exciting possibilities in photo and graphic reproduction such as record
covers, pop videos, and eye-catching magazine covers. Computer enhancement
of photographs has helped examine the explosion of the Challenger Space
Shuttle and exposed fake photos of the Loch Ness monster and UFOs.
  But they bring with them a moral dilemma: How far can one go? The temptation
to "improve" images or even fake them is now so much greater.
  As the machines improve and become more widespread, it will become more
and more difficult to tell the adulterated image from the unadulterated.
It might be that news magazines and newspapers will have to make public
declarations that they will not alter or change their photographs.
  Even a magazine world-famous for its photographs, National Geographic,
has succumbed to temptation (see picture). A director of the printing and
engraving section in Washington said the decision to move the pyramids
was out of "aesthetic reasons" and every effort is made to avoid this sort
of thing. "But the main point when using this type of technology is not
to alter the meaning of the photograph. We certainly didn't do that."
  "The only other changes we ever made to photographs was to tone over the
genitals of naked natives. This is a family magazine, after all. But we
don't even to that any more."
  In a letter to a disillusioned reader, the editor-in-chief of National
Geographic, Bill Garrett, said: "The effect was the same as if the
photographer had moved over a few feet. More important (to this issue)
is how much did the use of a telephoto lens move the pyramids? How much
did the colour change because of a filter? Were the camels there naturally
or were they brought there for the picture...?"
  National Geographic, of course, isn't the only one to have fallen to
temptation. Company annual reports in the US have appeared with a company's
new building surrounded by trees rather than the car parks which were in
the original photo. A 1982 photo book called Idylls of France reportedly
removed unsightly telegraph poles from a rural scene and litter from a stream
bed from the original photos.
  In Australia the ethics of retouching photographs were examined when the
Sydney Daily Telegraph ran a photo of Gough Whitlam sitting alone at his
desk shortly after the 1975 sacking. The caption said: "Mr Whitlam, a lonely
figure in the Federal Caucus room." In fact, the photo was taken at a press
conference and a secretary in the background had been painted out.
  The photographer was suspended from Parliament for two weeks and the paper
apologised, saying it was an error.
  However, over at the Sydney Morning Herald photographs appeared in the
early 1970s on Anzac and Remembrance days showing an old digger with jets
flying over his head. This was done by superimposing one photo over another,
both taken on the same day but impossible to get in the same frame.
  The news editor at the time, David Bowman, stopped this practice, saying
he thought a photograph should only have in it what was captured in the
lens.
  The National Times photographer, Lorrie Graham, whose work has been
published in books, magazines and newspapers around the world, says there
is little satisfaction for a photographer in "stooging" a photo.
  "It is usually only for the benefit of editors and the written word that
photos are changed. Photos themselves have never been sued, only the captions
have. But if this practice of forging photos ever happened in newspapers,
the lawyers would have more money than they can handle."

