Getting fit The minimal guide to health and fitness  Edited by Deborah Smith  

DOUBLES tennis - the social game in which you trot around the baseline,
and make the occasional lunge at the net - can kill you. That is, if it
lulls you into believing that you're doing enough exercise for the week.
You're not.
  If doubles tennis - or working around the house, gardening or taking the
dog for a stroll - is all the exercise you're getting, you are below the
fitness threshold. You might be having fun, but you're not helping yourself
to stay alive.
  On the other hand, the daunting vision of sweating, straining joggers
must be responsible, too, for setting back the health of the nation. Only
the very determined will survive to become serious joggers if they start
running when fairly unfit. It is hard to keep up enthusiasm until it becomes
enjoyable.
  Fortunately, it is a misconception that jogging is a must.
  But there is a threshold of regular exercise that has to be reached before
you can feel smug that your health is benefiting significantly by your effort.
For a start, it must be vigorous. Also, as a rule of thumb, it is necessary
to exercise for at least twenty minutes, three times a week.
  How vigorous must you get? As a minimum, your heart should be beating
more than 120 times a minute. Overdoing it can be dangerous. If you can't
talk, or whistle while you exercise, slow down. For greatest improvement
to your fitness, keep to a range between 70 to 85 per cent of your maximum
heart rate. (roughly 220 minus your age.)
  The longer your exercise sessions, the fitter you'll become. But beyond
an hour, the rewards drop off.
  Some people argue they get enough exercise during the day, doing work
around the house or labouring. Feeling exhausted each evening reinforces
this thinking. But these bouts of perhaps quite strenuous activity are not
the same as getting fit.
  Certainly, like doubles tennis, keeping busy prevents muscles from wasting
away and burns up calories, both valuable in preventing weight gain.
  But, for your heart to benefit, the activity must be sustained, aerobic
exercise like bicycling or jogging.

