A new leaf  

THE WEEKS before Christmas are a wild time for people who
are addicted to paper. Suddenly, the audio-visual world that
stopped writing generations ago with the invention of the
telephone is scrabbling around in its old drawers looking for
a pen and paper. Even people who were allergic to English at
school and never learned to type find it is the one time of the
year for a commitment beyond the STD pips. Phone conversations
are like hot-house flowers: expensive and beautiful but they
don't last. People still like to put themselves on the ruled
line.
   Christmas is the season for airmail letters from friends
burning Australian dollars to keep warm overseas. Foreign
stamps and packages arrive on the doorstep, as well as cards
and photographs of friends' new babies accompanied by notes
scrawled on bits of paper stained with banana-mush. As if to
put this seasonal scribble in its place, the computer retailers
wage their most savage war against paper at Christmas,
displaying their Apples and IBM packages with advertising
designed to make parents feel guilty about depriving their
children of the New Literacy where the screen is mightier than
the pen.
   Despite a six-year liaison with computers (apart from a
dose of repetitive strain injury, I have got along with mine
tolerably well), my hands still itch for paper and a thin-
nibbed fountain pen.
   An emotional taboo prevents me from writing home to Mamma
and Papa on the WordPerfect system. Buying a box of floppy
disks can never replace the pleasure of the stationery shop.
While the department stores provoke desires that only lead to
misery for those with little money at Christmas, the stationers
provide a sensual but affordable world of onion-skin papers,
boxed deckles, Japanese envelopes, French crayons, packets of
coloured drawing pins and Mickey Mouse pencil sharpeners.
   During times of depression, spending an hour in the
stationery shop is better than a Valium. It is especially
effective after a weep and a hot bath.
   When I was broke in New Zealand, an afternoon in Whitcoulls
was about the only entertainment I could afford. After
inspecting the embossed writing pads and the calligraphy pens,
I would indulge myself by choosing a 6B lead Copperplate pencil
or a single Derwent or perhaps a sheet of parchment-textured
flamingo paper and a black envelope lined with matching tissue.
Later, in my room of the old house I shared with student
flatmates, I would light beeswax candles, burn incense and,
with Elton John's Yellow Brick Road playing in the corridor, I
covered centimetres of the flamingo paper in a letter to
Melbourne. It felt as luxurious as splashing myself with a vial
of perfume.
   It is difficult to know exactly why boxes of paper-clips and
Chinese diaries of all sizes should fill a depressed person
with hope. All I know is that the phenomenon is similar to
spending an hour in a hardware store, checking out the masonry
nails, the picture hooks, superglues and extension cords,
without necessarily wanting to buy any - it seems enough to
know that they are there. Perhaps a mind out of sorts with
itself is soothed by seeing solid proof that there are methods
of fixing things. Or perhaps the hardware and the stationers
are so comforting because they supply the practical bits to the
drill of endless possibilities.
   All the sharpened pencils, the diaries of years yet to be
lived, organised, timetabled - the future is a tabula rasa and
suddenly it seems possible to scratch anything upon it. Unlike
looking through bookstores, where you're liable to be
overwhelmed by a feeling that it's all been said before,
stationery gives you the hope of turning over a new leaf.
   A floppy disk, with its black secrets, does not inspire the
same born-again joy of the blank foolscap page. Floppy disks
feel creepy; they have neurotic names such as Xidex, Verbatim
and Perfection. They are highly strung, sensitive; we mustn't
handle them with our hot, greasy human paws; the room must be
cool, we must store them in a special box, remove coffee cups
from their vicinity, shield them from magnetic rays and
virtually pull down the blinds and tuck them into bed at
nights. Even so, it is impossible to know when they'll betray
you by corroding, by springing bugs and scrambling your work.
   On the other hand, there is a receptivity about writing
paper that makes it the ultimate User Friendly material. Simply
touching a piece of paper stimulates creativity, the desire to
draw and scribble. Butchers' paper recalls childhood afternoons
when inspiration never ran out. A blank computer screen has
come to mean that one is either at work or in trouble and even
when the computer plays games it goes running to its program at
every human deviation, like a wimp to its Mamma. Paper,
however, has an intimate quality that is exploited by the
makers of teenage diaries. It handles secrets, fantasies,
poetry, nasty sniping bits of gossip, chats, reminders and
confessions that no one - least of all the MS-DOS
program - should see.
   It feels perverted to write a journal on screen.  

