<subsample>
	<id> G73a </id>
	


	<source> Good Weekend - June 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Dante's car park...where fools rush in </h>
	


	<bl> By Robert Haupt </bl>
	

I WENT shopping the other day. &quot;So!&quot; I hear you exclaim, closely followed
by &quot;what?&quot; Well, it is always a change for me. I shop, all right, but I
don't go shopping.
  Somewhere, some time, possibly during my brief, compulsory attendance
at Sunday school, someone implanted in me, as it was implanted in us by
the thousands, that shopping is ... well, dodgy spiritually*spirtually,
part of the soil of commerce, I suppose, and certainly not to be undertaken
for its own sake. (This idea never took off in America, where shopping and
religion have become intertwined and more genuine reverence may be found
at the mall than at the shrine.)
  So I generally sidle into stores, hope no one is looking and make a purchase
so abrupt that the salesperson goes round-eyed at my certainty. &quot;Are you
sure you don't want to look at the others?&quot; they will ask as I demand the
pair of slippers in the window, counting our the money as I talk. It is
a sort of smash-grab where you pay, a giving of money with menaces.
  But this time it was different. This time we were going to do it properly:
in the suburbs, where they know how to go shopping. And it was only a short
drive to the nearest Vast Shopping Centre. You know the VSC, there's probably
one near you. Actually, I'm not sure it isn't all the same one, right down
to the last bar of canned music.
  Only a short drive it was, as I say, to the VSC. Once within its portals,
however, it was a very long drive, oh a long and wearisome drive indeed:
so many kilometres did we cover inside this retail maze that I feared we
would have to stop the car for an oil change.
  When Dante wrote his Inferno, he had only Hell to work with. Imagine what
a terrific work of art he would have come up with had he known of the
multi-level carpark. There, instead of the sinners being arrayed in circles
while the tortures are inflicted on them, they move in endless circles through
a concrete purgatory assailed all the while by unbearable noise, unbreathable
fumes, impossible monotony.
  Through the smoke and gloom, you see the pallid, haunted faces peering
through the foggy windows of Range Rovers, men and women with corrugated
foreheads hunched in their seats.
  The procession would stop from time to time, leaving one staring at a
blank concrete wall or sniffing the exhaust of a machine called Bronco or
Mustang. After an unendurable delay, the crawl would begin again as you
always knew it would: torture without end may not be allowed to finish.
  Each of the countless levels of the multi-storey car-hell is the same
as the others. Occasionally, a glaring sign will go by saying&quot;Liquor Pick-Up&quot;
or &quot;Ezy-grow Garden Care Centre&quot; but there's no way of remembering where
you saw them or even, after a while, when.
  It occurs to you that you entered this concrete car-canyon a young man
full of hope. You believed - poor fool - that it was going to be simple:
drive in, stop; get out, shop.
  Ah, folly! The VSC doesn't want clear-eyed, un-disoriented people as its
shoppers. It has no use for people just in off the street. It wants you
the way it gets you: broken by noise, smell, delay, anxiety, boredom and
all that circling.
  When it gets you after such a torture, it knows it has got you. Just as
a victim of brainwashing must be given a new identity to cling to after
his old one has been broken down, so the VSC inserts its ersatz reality
into minds made blank by half an hour (or was it half a lifetime?) in Dante's
Car Park.
  And what a world it is, retail! Lights, mirrors, lights in mirrors, mirrored 
reflections of lights in mirrors, all is dazzle and glitter after the sensory 
deprivation of Dantes. Vistas sweep; paths beckon; cash registers go pip, pap, 
barp against the engulfing flow of Music to Buy By. You hear a man demand, &quot;I 
know it is a copy but is it a real copy?&quot; and you begin to wonder whether the 
chintz is fake.
  Is it by accident with the VSC that the contrast is so great between outside
and within? Or is it cleverly, even fiendishly, designed to make the real
outside seem grim so that the tawdry inside seems glam? The owners of VSCs
would no doubt say that all they do is concentrate their resources on the
point of sale but if that were really true wouldn't they provide that most
useful, most scarce resource of all - the sales assistant who knows something
about the goods on sale?
  And who are the owners of these mausoleums of merchandise, anyway? It's
always a consortium of companies with names like Selvac and Martran with
interlocking directorships and branch offices in the Cayman Islands. The
principals are as hard to find as their principles are easy to understand.
  Principle No. 1: don't give 'em what they want, make 'em want what you've
got to give 'em.
  Principle No. 2: when in doubt, install more mirrors.
  Principle No. 3: who needs more than two principles?
  While they go off to coffee in their Rollses, we load the fruits of this
Age of Wonders - the finest commodities Taiwan can offer - into our Holdens
and bring them home, where they never quite look the same. 
  Why is it, after going shopping, I feel like taking a bath?


</subsample>
