Lionel Murphy's last stand By John Stackhouse  

THE TWO-YEAR drama involving Justice Lionel Murphy will now inevitably
end in tragedy. On Friday, the 63-year-old High Court judge, stricken with
terminal cancers, engaged in a crushing public exchange with the Chief Justice,
Sir Harry Gibbs, then ended his long isolation from the bench by marching
in with his brother justices and taking the seat he had not occupied while
facing criminal charges.
  Murphy's action effectively put an end to the legal and political
controversy that has surrounded him, the parliament and the court since
newspaper publication of the illegal New South Wales police phone taps
two-and-a-half years ago. The taps were on the telephone of Sydney solicitor
Morgan Ryan. Murphy's was identified as one of the voices on the tape and
allegedly he became involved in conspiring to influence the outcome of
criminal matters involving Ryan.
  A trial, before Justice Henry Cantor in the NSW Supreme Court found him
guilty and Murphy was sentenced to 18 months in jail. But the appeals court
threw out the verdict and the sentence and ordered another trial. At that
trial, Murphy chose to make an unsworn statement from the dock direct to
the jury, a course which drew unprecedented criticism from the legal
establishment. He was acquitted and discharged.
  But last May, before Murphy could resume his seat on the bench, the
government was told his brother judges would go on judicial strike. Prime
Minister Bob Hawke ordered rush legislation to be drafted for an investigation
by three retired judges into his fitness to occupy the bench.
  On Friday, Murphy broke the news he was suffering from bowel and liver
cancer in their secondary stages. "There is no cure and no treatment," he
said in a press statement. "The advice is that in the absence of a remission
I shall not live very long. At the moment, I am not in any pain and I feel
quite well. My medical advice is that I am able to resume sitting on the
court. I have chosen to spend what portion I can of the limited time available
in doing as much judicial duty as I usefully can."
  Murphy also said he would not attend any more hearings of the parliamentary
inquiry. He ended the statement like a battler: "Despite the medical advice,
I have not given up hope."
  Before the court resumed, Gibbs took the unusual step of issuing his own
press statement. He recorded Murphy's notice that he intended to "exercise
his constitutional right to sit on the court notwithstanding that the
parliamentary commission of inquiry has not yet made its report".
  Gibbs went on: "It is essential that the integrity and reputation of any
justice of this court be seen to be beyond question. That being so I regard
it as most undesirable that Mr Justice Murphy should sit while matters
into which the commission is inquiring remain unresolved and before the
commission has made its report."
  After the Gibbs statement, Murphy retaliated. He made public a letter
which he had sent Gibbs earlier emphasising his "constitutional right to
sit until death, resignation or removal... It is not for the Chief Justice
or any justice to decide whether it is undesirable for any other justice
to sit on the court. It is improper for one judge to publicly express an
opinion on the desirability of another to continue as a justice or to exercise
his functions as a justice. This is at the foundation of the independence
of the judiciary."
  Murphy also took the chance to pin on Gibbs the responsibility for panicking
the Hawke government into setting up the parliamentary inquiry after Murphy's
acquittal on the conspiracy charges. He claimed: "In May the government,
through two ministers, informed me that you had said that if I resumed
sitting the court might or would go on strike. I now know that most members
of the court had not even contemplated such a course. However, I have not
heard any public denial by you."
  After this exchange, Murphy's entrance to the court had the effect of
making the inquiry irrelevant. He clearly had the government's support.
Before flying to London, Hawke said while Gibbs was entitled to his opinion
"it is clear it is a different one to mine". At the same time, the acting
Attorney-General Gareth Evans announced the government would pay Murphy's
inquiry costs, estimated at about $500,000. Friends do not expect Murphy
to remain on the bench very long. By sitting on Friday and again this week,
he has made his point and in the eyes of his supporters has vindicated
himself. His action closes his career and also a chapter in the history
of the court.
  Murphy's letter to Gibbs underlines a little understood point. As he was
apppointed before changes in judicial tenure in 1977, Murphy is a judge
for life. Gibbs as Chief Justice must retire at the age of 70 in a few months.
  Now, inevitably and tragically, the government will make two appointments
to the court which will substantially change its balance, from conservative
to liberal and from favoring state diversity to centralism. In his last
sittings, in fact, Murphy's liberalism and centralism may well influence
the way the commonwealth's powers are exercised as a result of cases that
have been sitting on the back burner because of difficulty in convening
a full court in Murphy's absence.
  Former Senate president Justin O'Byrne said at the weekend: "I accuse
his accusers of sentencing him to death by the substantial pressures they
have placed upon him." A legal admirer said: "I have no doubt the disease
was caused by the unrelenting campaign against him. There is a collegiate
ideology in the law which is overwhelmingly conservative. Anyone who steps
outside the consensus is automatically a traitor."
  Outside the emotional context of the weekend's events, medical opinion
is divided on whether pressures on an individual can or cannot trigger
cancer. Although the question is controversial, there is a strong body of
anecdotal evidence to suggest stress does.
  As another friend said: "During these two years or more Lionel has bottled
up his stress. To the people around him he has exuded unruffled good humor
and has never let himself seem to be depressed. He never let it out or seemed
to give the stress any relief." Murphy will live on in Labor legend and
ensure that he becomes a martyr to the changes the Whitlam era brought about
in Australia.

