Pope John Paul's Australian Church: uncertain, confused   

When Pope John Paul visits all state capitals and Canberra from November
24 to December 1 he will find the Catholic Church suffering a leadership
crisis and his flock in a spiritual malaise. TONY ABBOTT analyses the state
of the Australian Church which has four million adherents while PETER BLAZEY
reports on the marketing of the Pope.

WHEN POPE John Paul II arrives for a six-day visit in November he will be
accompanied by fanfare and formality far surpassing that of any recent royal
tour. The cheering crowds and the Hollywood touch of the tour organisers,
however, will make little impact on the serious difficulties confronting
the Catholic Church in Australia. According to conservatives, the Pope
will not have time to hustle the local bishops into shape. According to
progressives, the Pope will not have time to listen to what the Australian
people are really saying.
  The Pope is undoubtedly a great leader yet he often appears to be leading
in different directions at the same time. His personal experience of nazi
occupation and communist rule has given him a yearning for freedom, yet
he is utterly devoted to the Church's age-old hierarchical structure. He
is a scholar of considerable standing, yet his total dedication to traditional
Catholic teaching renders him deeply unsympathetic to "progressive"
theologians. He was a major actor in the Church-state intrigue that 
constitutes Polish politics, yet he has consistently opposed political 
alignment by the Church and an official political role for priests. He 
is a man of immense personal warmth and charm, yet his views on human 
sexuality strike many as inhumane.
  The respect and even fear which he inspires in governments as diverse
as those of the Soviet Union - whose interest in his death, if not actual
involvement in the 1981 assassination attempt, is obvious - and the Northern
Territory - which is said to have objected to his planned visit to Alice
Springs and putative talk on land rights - demonstrates the moral authority
of his heroic if contradictory personality. Recently described by Prime
Minister Bob Hawke as "quite an outstanding man" and "remarkable by any
standards", the Pope will need all his gifts to lift the local Church which
displays, according to Patrick O'Farrell, professor of history at the
University of New South Wales, "little conspicuous vitality".
  The most obvious sign of institutional stagnation is the chronic shortage
of priests. In metropolitan Sydney, for instance, the number of active
priests under 75 has fallen from 314 in 1976 to 243 today. By 2000, it
is estimated that the number will have fallen by more than 50 percent to
113 which will be sufficient to staff only 58 percent of existing parishes.
  Additional duties have exacerbated the heavy pressures on men who are
deprived of family life and often lack professional recognition. A paper
presented to the Australian bishops' conference in 1984 and reported in
the National Council of Priests newsletter claimed that religious reform
and social change meant that priests were suffering a "sense of powerless,
meaningless, self-estrangement and isolation".
  As one senior priest puts it, there is a widespread view, even among
Catholics, that entering the priesthood "is the waste of a life". In a
28-page paper presented to the Australian bishops in 1984, Dr Grove Johnson,
then rector of St Patrick's Seminary in Sydney, said that the "crisis of
the priesthood" was the "deepest crisis facing the Church". Johnson claimed
that trainee priests' lengthy isolation in seminaries risked producing "loyal
and devoted members of the clerical club ... at the expense of truly human
development" and that this was contributing to the Church's alienation from
modern culture and inability to speak with the world. There is no reason
to believe Johnson has changed his views.
  The crisis of the priesthood is accompanied by a crisis of the laity
- regular Mass attendance is estimated to be down from more than 50 percent
of Catholics only 10 years ago to fewer than 30 percent today. The recent
fining of a devout Christian who refused to let his house to an unmarried
couple, the ineffectiveness - except in Queensland - of Christian priests
over the screening of the allegedly blasphemous film Hail Mary and the
refusal of half of the 1983 federal Labor ministry to take the oath of office
on the Bible are ominous straws in the wind.
  In recent decades all Christian denominations have struggled to come
to terms with a society that is comfortable and well-educated and therefore
indifferent to religion and sceptical. This adjustment has been hardest
for the Catholic Church which used to pride itself on its rejection of
much of the modern world. The Roman Catholic Church which emerged from the
Reformation and which endured until 1965 was called by its leading theorist
"as clear and palpable a reality as the Kingdom of France or the republic
of Venice". The Church of those days found its most peculiar expression
in the Syllabus of Errors of 1864 which condemned the proposition that
the Pope "can and ought to reconcile and adjust himself with progress,
liberalism and modern civilisation". But since the Vatican Council of the
early 60s the Church has been struggling to do just that - to re-express
its ancient faith in ways that fit the "signs of the times".
  In Australia, the problem of changing religious identity has been compounded
by a collapse of Catholic social identity. Until 1950, Australian Catholicism
was overwhelmingly Irish and underprivileged and the natural affinity of
religion, race and class was reinforced by a shared preoccupation with
the principal means of getting ahead in a hostile world - Catholic education.
Since then, increasing affluence has eroded the Church's social prestige,
ethnic diversity has dissolved Irish solidarity and state aid has deprived
ordinary Catholics of the need to struggle together to preserve the schools
which are the embodiment of the faith. It is no longer clear what Australian
Catholicism is about.
  The old Catholic edifice of schools, hospitals and parishes is still there
but its purpose is less certain. Conservatives deplore the passing of the
Latin Mass, Roman collars and fish on Fridays. Radicals demand women priests,
married clergy and freedom from Papal interference. The vast majority stand
hesitantly in the middle welcoming the greater humanity of the modern Church
but sensing, too, its loss of cohesion and bravura.
  The old order is passing away but the shape of the new is by no means
clear. Are the bishops determined to rebuild a powerful social institution
or are they prepared to let the institutional Church dissolve into a loose
association of like-minded seekers after spiritual truth? Does the Church
possess divine truth and the unique means to salvation or is it just another
benevolent group in a pluralist society? The breakdown of Catholic
self-confidence - if permanent - will have a profound effect not just on
the nation's four million Catholics but on Australian culture generally
in which Catholicism has long been the most organised Christian force.
  While the manpower crisis will prove most immediately fatal to the Church
as it has been known, the fundamental crisis is one of leadership. The
leadership structure of the Roman Catholic Church is often misunderstood.
An organisation "flow chart" would probably start at the top with the Pope
and proceed downwards through bishops and priests to the laity (which includes
religious brothers and sisters). The Pope's pre-eminent position, however,
is not due to his more exalted office - he too is a bishop - but to the
fact that the bishop of Rome has traditionally been regarded as the guardian
and repository of the Catholic faith. The other Catholic bishops derive
their catholicity from their "communion" with the bishop of Rome. The
Church is certainly hierarchical but at the top of the local hierarchy
is not the Pope but the local bishop. The Pope exercises power over the
Church in Australia indirectly through the bishops whom he appoints and
directly through the universal rules which he establishes for the maintenance
of the Catholic faith.
  For most of this century the worldwide Catholic Church seemed to be a
benevolent papal dictatorship. This appearance was due to the relative
unanimity of Catholics rather than to the discipline of Rome. When the
Church is riven with widespread and serious differences, as has been the
case since the Vatican council, the practical power of the Pope is severely
circumscribed.
  The Catholic Church is not so much a papal Church as a bishops' Church.
As successors of the apostles, the bishops are responsible for all Church
activities within their dioceses. Nevertheless, the rules and instructions
emanating from Rome, the necessity to consult before making certain
decisions, the need to ensure the support of priests and to avoid alienation
of the people, are important legal and practical constraints on episcopal
leadership.
  Effective leadership in the Church depends upon the leadership qualities
of individual office-holders. The power of popes, bishops and priests largely
depends upon their ability to inspire and persuade. In the case of Australian
Catholic churchmen, this ability seems extremely rare beyond that small
and diminishing group of Catholics who are prepared to do whatever "father"
says. The Australian bishops are men whose formative years were spent in
an enclosed clerical world which fostered team spirit and prudence but
not human warmth, worldly wisdom or creative imagination. It is not
surprising that they have shown more concern for shoring up a crumbling
traditional structure than enthusiasm for constructive engagement with
the world. 
  According to Bob Santamaria, the task which the Pope has set himself and
to which his extensive travels are directed is the restoration of a clear
sense of what it means to be a Catholic. Santamaria, whose control of the
anti-communist Catholic Social Studies Movement in the 50s is said to have
earned him the status of "lay-bishop", believes that the Pope's task in
Australia, no less than elsewhere in the Western world, is to reassert
traditional doctrine against its critics among priests, nuns and even bishops.
  For Santamaria, traditional doctrine is what is laid down in scripture,
the creeds and the texts of Church councils as authoritatively interpreted
by successive popes. This, however, is not as simple as it sounds. There
are religious disputes to which Catholicism has no authoritative answer.
In the 17th century there was a virulent controversy between the Jesuits
and the Dominicans over whether man was capable of goodness without the
help of God. Ultimately, the Pope proclaimed that both views were permissible.
Then there is the problem of papal pronouncements which seem wrong. Who
today would accept without qualification the statement of Pope Boniface
VIII in 1302 that it is "absolutely necessary for salvation that every human
creature be subject to the Roman pontiff"?
  A great deal of what the man in the pew would call "traditional doctrine"
is criticised by Catholic scholars who believe that religious truth ought
to be explained in a rational way if possible and that religious strictures
ought to be judged by the spirit rather than by the letter of Church law.
Thus the German Hans Kung, critically examining the Gospel, explains the
resurrection of Jesus as a mystical experience of the disciples and the
virgin birth as an edifying fable designed to enhance the aura of an
extraordinary personality; the American Charles Curran, claiming that the
ultimate Christian imperative is love, justifies contraception, abortion,
homosexuality, masturbation and other Catholic taboos in limited
circumstances; and the Brazilian Leonardo Boff, writing in the context
of massive institutional exploitation and oppression, deprecates Church
structures that seem wedded to corrupt establishments.
  The question is: Can these thinkers and those with similar views in every
nook and cranny of Australian Catholic life sustain their objections to
the traditional understanding and remain Catholic? A "yes" answer implies
that Church teaching is essentially provisional, subject to the advance
of human reason; a "no" implies there is nothing new to be learnt. Not
surprisingly, the Pope himself is having an each-way bet.

