By Margaret Duckett NEW SOUTH WALES A. INTRODUCTION  

   New South Wales has been the epicentre of the AIDS epidemic in
Australia, with 70% of the cases and an incidence of
infectivity of 33.1 per million of population.

   The Albion Street Centre was established in early 1985 and
remains the only clinic in Australia directed exclusively to
AIDS. Other services have been expanded to meet the need,
however the situation is still critical.

   A number of innovative and effective education programs have
been developed to address the issues posed by AIDS.

 B. CO-ORDINATION AND ADVICE  

   The New South Wales Department of Health has established three committees
to provide advice on matters related to AIDS.

   i) The AIDS Medical and Scientific Committee provides advice on matters 
relevant to the identification, diagnosis and treatment of persons infected 
by the AIDS virus. This Committee has a membership providing expertise in
areas including public health, immunology, venereology, virology, oncology 
and haematology.

   ii) The AIDS Education Committee focusses on the establishment of
appropriate educational strategies. Committee members provide expertise
in health education and public health. 

   iii) The AIDS Liaison Committee provides a mechanism for
consultation with community groups. This Committee includes
representatives of the Albion Street Centre, the Health Media
and Education Centre, the Australian Prostitutes Collective, the
AIDS Council of NSW, the AIDS Drug Information Collective, the
NSW Venereology Society and the NSW Nurses Association.

   Two working parties and two interdepartmental committees
have also been formed to provide co-ordination and advice. A
working party assessing educational material on intravenous
drug use and AIDS has been created and issues relating to
hospice care are being explored by a second working party.

   An interdepartmental committee on housing for clients
infected with the AIDS virus has been established. Members
include representatives of the Departments of Health, Youth and
Community Services, Housing and the Bobby Goldsmith Foundation.
The Committee has developed policies and procedures in relation
to the availability and use of special housing. A second
interdepartmental committee provides advice on issues related
to school children infected with the AIDS virus. Members
include representatives of the Departments of Health, Youth and
Community Services, and Education.

 C. FUNDING  

   Since 1984, New South Wales has received an allocation for
AIDS related areas from both State and Federal Governments of
$11,331,000. This level of funding has enabled the
establishment and development of a number of programs including
educational strategies, laboratory diagnostic services,
outpatient services, blood bank screening, counselling and
nursing.

   i) Education a) General  
The NSW Department of Health has developed a number of
educational programs in regard to AIDS.

   Intensive courses of seven days duration have been conducted
for health, welfare and education personnel responsible for the
provision of education regarding AIDS. The courses have been
designed to provide accurate, authoritative and useful
information about AIDS, to explore issues associated with AIDS,
and to stimulate the further development of educational
activities.

   Seminars and workshops have also been designed to meet
particular needs of various professional groups including
health care workers, health educators, drug and alcohol agency
staff, counsellors, and youth services personnel.

   A video and associated discussion booklet has been developed
to assist with providing the general community with accurate
information on AIDS and its implications.

   A statewide information line has been established to provide
information on AIDS, its symptoms and transmission, and on
referral agencies for further information. The usage of this
service currently stands at 5,700 calls per month.

    b) Youth  
The NSW Health Department has initiated an Adolescents and
AIDS Project. This special project has surveyed youth services
in NSW to assess requirements in relation to education and
resources. Training and information seminars have been provided
for youth and welfare workers from a range of services, and
extensive literature distribution has been arranged. A resource
manual for use by youth workers and educators of adolescents
has been developed.

   A special health education project directed to youth and
presented in comic form has been prepared by Streetwize Comics.
The comics have been well received by young people and will be
utilised in a series of seminars directed to youth workers.

   A special outreach program for young people is conducted by
the Albion Street Centre. A nurse and a counsellor in a mobile
screening unit visit particular areas in the inner city to
provide education, support, counselling and an AIDS virus
antibody screening service.

    c) Multicultural  
Ethnic media outlets have been utilised in an information
campaign about AIDS and STDs for people of non-English speaking
backgrounds. In addition, seminars for ethnic health care
workers have been provided. A pamphlet on AIDS has been
translated into nine community languages and full page
information advertisements have been placed in 17 community
language newspapers. Key community organisations, migrant
health staff and medical practitioners have also received
relevant information. The campaign has been promoted on SBS
Television and ethnic community radio. Ethnic Line, a telephone
referral service for people of non-English speaking background,
has reported that there has been a strong community response
to the campaign.

    d) Prostitutes  
The Australian Prostitutes Collective has received funding from
the NSW and Federal Departments of Health to provide
preventative education regarding AIDS and other STDs. Three
field officers conduct outreach visits, present fortnightly
information seminars and prepare educational material
specifically directed to the target groups. A counselling
service is also provided.

   The STD Clinics and a new special clinic in Kings Cross
provide a health service including education on AIDS. It would
appear that most brothels and agencies have installed condom
vending machines and a majority of prostitutes require condom
use by their clients.

    e) Intravenous drug users  
Strategies in relation to intravenous drug users have
focussed on providing education and support for AIDS
infected clients through existing drug treatment services.

   The majority of staff in government and non government
agencies have attended educational seminars and workshops to
ensure that they have the necessary information and skills to
educate and counsel clients about AIDS issues. Direct education
to intravenous drug users has also been provided through
outreach programs and contact tracing. The AIDS Drug
Information Collective has been particularly involved in the
development and promotion of these outreach programmes. A
specialised poster and pamphlet directed towards intravenous
drug users has been developed and distributed to appropriate
venues. Issues related to the availability of needles and
syringes are under consideration.

    f) Regional activities  
The Department of Health has conducted intensive courses in
the larger regional centres for health, welfare and education
personnel. Seminars and meetings with members of the general
community and particular professional groups such as
pharmacists have also been facilitated.

    ii) Counselling  
A range of counselling services is provided by a number of
centres. Clients have access to personal counselling by medical
practitioners, experienced social workers, psychologists or
trained volunteers as appropriate. Support groups for a range
of AIDS affected people have been established to provide both
information and therapy. Material is made available on the AIDS
virus, health strategies, ways to reduce stress, and other
relevant information.

    iii) Services  
A State Reference Laboratory has been established at St
Vincents Hospital to undertake confirmatory tests on any
seropositive cases. The ICPMR unit at Westmead Hospital is
designated as the State Reference Laboratory for AIDS virology.

   Specialist outpatient services have been established at the
Albion Street Centre, the STD Clinics, and the major teaching
hospitals. These services have specialised staff and facilities
to provide reliable and complete medical information in
addition to pastoral, psychiatric and social counselling. The
Albion Street Centre in particular provides intensive medical
management and support services.

   A number of special units are available for patients
requiring hospitalisation. St Vincents Hospital has six beds
available, Prince of Wales/Prince Henry fourteen beds,
Newcastle four beds, and Prince Alfred four beds. In addition,
most of the teaching hospitals have also accommodated patients
infected with the AIDS virus. Five hospice beds are also
available.

   Most agencies providing services to intravenous drug users
have developed policies and procedures in regard to AIDS.
Clients who are AIDS virus antibody positive have priority in
access to the methadone program.

 D. LEGAL ISSUES  

There are a number of legislative enactments which make
specific provisions or have relevance in regard to AIDS.

    i) Notification  
The Venereal Diseases Act was amended in August 1984 to provide
that Category A and B AIDS were notifiable on a compulsory basis.

   The Public Health Act 1902 was amended in November 1985 and
Regulations under this Act gazetted on 14 April 1986 to deem
AIDS (Category A, B or C) as a proclaimed disease under the
Act; require medical practitioners to notify the
Secretary of the NSW Department of Health of cases (by code),
penalty $1000, and create an offence if a person who knows
he/she has a proclaimed disease has sexual intercourse with
another person without the prior informed consent of the other
person, penalty $5,000.

   Records of the Commonwealth Department of Health would
indicate that this provision and the provision subsequently
enacted in Queensland appear to be the only legislation
worldwide which seeks to regulate the sexual conduct of people
with AIDS or related conditions.

   The Act also includes clauses providing penalties for
unnecessary disclosure of the identity of persons having
proclaimed diseases, penalty $2000.

   The legislation also regulates the activities of medical
practitioners and laboratories in regard to notification of the
disease, maintenance of records, confidentiality and provision
of information to patients.

    ii) Donation of blood and tissue  
The enactment of the Human Tissue (Amendment) Act in May
1985 provided that blood and semen may not be received for
transfusion or artificial insemination unless a prescribed
certificate is signed relating to the medical suitability of
the donor. The certificate is not required if the specimen is
to be used for research purposes only or for sole treatment of
the donor. A person who knowingly signs a false or misleading
statement may be liable for a penalty of $5000 or imprisonment
for one year, or both.

    iii) Legislation  
a) The Public Health (Skin Penetration) Regulation 1985
regulates activities which involve penetration of the skin or
tissue, including acupuncture, chiropody, podiatry, tattooing.

   b) The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1983, regulates
health and safety in the workplace. A number of organisations
have adopted occupational health and safety policies and
procedures which have positive implications in regard to AIDS,
in recognition of their responsibilities under the Act.

   c) The Anti-Discrimination Act 1977 makes it unlawful to
discriminate on the grounds of sex, race, marital status,
homosexuality, and physical or intellectual disability in the
areas of employment, state education, obtaining goods and
services, accommodation, registered clubs and trade unions.

   The Anti-Discrimination Board investigates and attempts to
conciliate complaints of discrimination in areas covered by the
Act. If conciliation can not be achieved, complaints may be
referred to the Equal Opportunity Tribunal for judicial
determination. To date, the Board has received approximately
15 complaints which were directly AIDS related, in addition to
those other complaints on grounds such as homosexuality which
may have had some AIDS related causes.

 E. DEPARTMENTAL RESPONSES i) Department of Health  
The Department of Health has established an AIDS/STD policy
unit with a full-time staff of four, and an AIDS education unit
with a full-time staff of five.

   The policy unit has responsibility for evaluating all
government and community AIDS projects and assessing the
funding necessary for these initiatives. In addition, officers
undertake liaison with a range of agencies.

   The activities of the education unit have been directed
towards health care personnel, members of high risk groups,
youth workers, personnel responsible for the provision of
education, and to the general community. Resource material has
been developed and extensive literature distribution arranged.

    ii) Department of Corrective Services  
The Department of Corrective Services has adopted a number
of policies and procedures in response to the issues posed by
AIDS.

   In January 1985 an AIDS Advisory Committee was formed with
representation from relevent departmental divisions, the Prison
Medical Service, the then Health Commission and the Public
Service Association. AIDS groups were established during late
1985 in most corrective service institutions throughout the
state to facilitate education for prisoners and staff. 

