CHAPTER FOUR A NATIONAL APPROACH  

4.1      The Committee next considers how the major
recommendation it makes might best be assured practical
application within the Australian community and especially how
it might effectively require the adherence of those undertaking
biomedical research. It is necessary to describe briefly the
current manner in which any guidelines in this area are
promulgated and applied.

4.2      At the national level, a government approved, non-
statutory regulatory code, issued by the NH&MRC, is
administered by its Medical Research Ethics Committee (MREC)
which was formally established in 1982. The guidelines are
contained in the `NH&MRC Statement on Human Experimentation and
Supplementary Notes' 1985.

4.3      These guidelines, which have been formally approved
by the Minister for Health, state that all medical research
should be approved by an IEC constituted and functioning
according to the NH&MRC revised Supplementary Note 1. However,
the NH&MRC cannot insist that institutions undertaking medical
research have an IEC, except where it funds that research.
Further, non-compliance with guidelines can only be penalised
by withdrawal of funding. Equally it does not have the power
to oversee IEC's without State acquiescence because
jurisdiction over medical practice and research is a State
matter.

4.4      Thus in Australia a voluntary system of regulation of
medical research operates with some national oversight. In
practice it would seem that ethics committees have been set up
in most institutions to consider research and to approve or
refuse research protocols submitted to them. It would also seem
that the NH&MRC guidelines in this area are adhered to.

4.5      However, it must be noted that these guidelines give
very considerable scope to IECs to determine which
preimplantation-stage embryos might be subject to either basic
category of experimentation. Thus one IEC may consider
unethical the creation of embryos simply for the purpose of
non-therapeutic experimentation whilst deeming ethical such
experimental use of surplus embryos. Another IEC may permit
both, another may sanction neither. Again, the type of
experimentation to be undertaken is entirely left in the hands
of an IEC.

4.6      In recent years the MREC, with approval and funding
from the NH&MRC, has conducted audits of IVF clinics in
Australia. These audits have been carried out on the basis of
voluntary acceptance by each institution of an invitation by
the MREC to participate in its review. Twelve centres had been
visited as of 31 December 1985 and, in the words of the MREC,
the response had been `uniformly cooperative'. In conducting
these audits the MREC has examined such matters as the presence
and constitution of IECs, the review of protocols by IECs, the
type of projects undertaken involving human embryos, and the
maintenance of registers of statistics on IVF procedures and
the fate of embryos created through IVF.

4.7      Much of the general adherence to the NH&MRC guidelines
is due to to the work of the Fertility Society of
Australia, a society of medical practitioners in the area of
IVF, which has produced a set of standards for self-regulation
of IVF practice (`Programme Standards for Infertility Units
using In Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) and Related Technologies
Involving Egg and Embryo Collection and Transfer including
Gamete Intra Fallopian Transfer (GIFT).') Standard 16 of the
guidelines reads:

         Any experimentation involving fertilization or embryos
         must be signed by the governing or associated       
         institution Ethics Committee and confined to ethical 
         guidelines established by the NH&MRC and appropriate 
         State Government.

Units which agree to abide by these standards are accredited
by the Society.

4.8      The Victorian Government has legislated to regulate
procedures associated with reproductive technology with the
Infertility (Medical Procedures) Act 1984. The majority of the
Act has yet to be proclaimed but it specifically prohibits a
number of experiments involving embryos while vesting
considerable power in a Standing Review and Advisory Committee.
Under s. 6(3) a person is prohibited from carrying out an
`experimental procedure' unless it has been approved by the
Committee. An `experimental procedure' is defined in s. 6(4)
as:

         ... a procedure that involves carrying out research
         on an embryo of a kind that would cause damage to the 
         embryo, would make the embryo unfit for implantation
         or would reduce the prospects of a pregnancy resulting
         from the implantation of the embryo.

4.9      In addition, cloning and fertilising human gametes
with non-human gametes are `prohibited procedures' under s.
6(1) of the Act and these latter prohibitions may not be
overridden. Although the Act has yet to be substantially
proclaimed, clinicians and research scientists in Victoria have
undertaken to abide by its general principles.

4.10     Several witnesses strongly supported the system of
IECs. Thus, Dr James Cummins, Secretary of the Australian
Society for Reproductive Biology, stated: `... I would prefer
to see a system of institutional ethics committees deciding
these matters at the coal-face, so to speak'. The relative
autonomy of IECs with their voluntary adherence to the NH&MRC
guidelines, allowing a very varied range of experimental
procedures to be permitted in various institutions, was claimed
by some witnesses to be a good thing in that it allowed local
community mores, or ethical stances peculiar to that
institution, to be observed. Of course, put another way, this
also allows for bias in the selection by the institution of
members of IECs so as to ensure a particular approach is
adopted. It may be desirable for a member (nominated by either
State or Federal government) to be appointed to each IEC.

4.11     As pointed out in the Asche Committee Report:

         This "honour system" of regulating research into    
         reproductive technology has worried people like     
         Professor Louis Waller, chairman of the Victorian   
         Committee, who in 1984 expressed his concern that: "an 
         honour system can work only where people are        
         honourable. Is honour enough? My feeling is that it 
         is not." (Melbourne "Age", 28.6.84). Professor Waller 
         also indicated his belief that medical research should 
         be controlled by legislation.

4.12     The question of honour is specifically relevant to
the commercialisation of IVF techniques. The commercialisation
of research and consequent provision of funding independent of
the NH&MRC can lead to a situation where there is no pressure
to require adherence to such guidelines as may exist. In this
situation, for such guidelines to have force, some legally
enforceable adherence to them must be achieved.

4.13     Evidence was put to the Committee favouring a
consistent nationwide approach. As stated by Dr John Kerin, who
was then Head of the Reproductive Medicine Unit of the Queen
Elizabeth Hospital in Adelaide:

         Right from the beginning our group and many other   
         groups in Australia would have preferred that a     
         national body were set up to look at terms of       
         reference, with recommendations preferably on       
         legislation as to what IVF programs should be doing. 
         I think this was echoed by Justice Kirby to me and to 
         other people publicly some four years ago - that it   
         would be better to have a national expert body looking 
         at these new advances rather than a State to State  
         situation because what we are getting now, unless I 
         am wrong, is that we will have different rules, say, 
         in Victoria, and different rules in South Australia; 
         that makes a mockery of the situation and we lose   
         credibility. There is confusion amongst the infertile 
         couples. They go to one State for one form of       
         treatment and they come here for another. It causes 
         a lot of confusion and a loss of credibility and I  
         would firmly support a national expert approach rather 
         than a State to State approach.

4.14     Professor Roger Short, representing the Academy of
Science in evidence before the Committee stated:

         The Academy's view would be to plead with this      
         Committee to set up Federal as opposed to State     
         legislation. It is really going to make chaos if we 
         have differing State legislation within differing   
         States and it would just make a nonsense of the law. 
         This is a very good instance of an occasion when one 
         needs some strong, central, Federal guidance on this 
         issue, because it is of great concern to a large    
         number of people.

4.15     Backing for a nation-wide approach may be given by the
Parliaments at the national and/or State levels. Thus Professor
Richard Lovell, chairman of the MREC stated in evidence:

         We believe there ought to be a national overview. We
         believe that so far we have given the national      
         overview of the ethical headlines, and we believe that 
         where muscle is needed the State governments ought to 
         be asked to acknowledge these national guidelines, or 
         the whole of supplementary note 4, in other words. We
         believe that State governments should be prompted to
         identify, if they have not already done so, every   
         institution in which IVF is developed and to make it 
         perhaps a condition of an institution's registration 
         that it comply with national guidelines.

Mr Ian Johnston, chairman of the Reproductive Biology Unit of
Royal Women's Hospital in Melbourne, expressed the opinion that
some sort of State licensing system incorporating the NH&MRC
guidelines would be appropriate.

4.16     Dr Aileen Connon, who co-chaired the South Australian
Working Party on In Vitro Fertilisation and Artificial
Insemination by Donor, stated in evidence to the Committee:

         I believe that, in terms of controls, guidelines for
         research in IVF such as the NHMRC ones, have served
         a useful purpose, but they are no longer sufficient.
         I believe that licensing of programs is essential. I
         do not think hospital ethics committees are effective
         in controlling potential program development in the
         future. I believe that, as Warnock has said, breaches
         of licensing regulations - if they ever come in -   
         should be indictable offences. I think independent  
         regulatory or monitoring committees should exist in 
         each State.

4.17     The Committee does not consider that the present
system of IECs, giving voluntary adherence to nationally
promulgated guidelines, is adequate. It is highly desirable
that the whole Australian community observe uniform ethical
standards in a matter as crucial as human embryo
experimentation. The Asche Committee Report emphasises `...
that the social, moral, legal and ethical questions involved
in the area of reproductive technology are not confined within
State boundaries. They are national issues which should be
addressed at a national level.'

4.18 This can be achieved by a co-operative approach between
the Federal and State legislatures and governments. The
Committee is aware of the very short, direct reach of
Commonwealth Constitutional power in this area. In fact, the
Victorian State Government in a written submission stated:

         ... Victoria feels considerable concern that the Bill
         attempts the exercise by the Commonwealth of a power
         where the States have power to legislate, that of the
         regulation of medical practice and research. Lacking
         direct power to regulate these matters, the         
         Commonwealth has to have recourse to indirect means 
         of control which only partially cover the area. This 
         is of concern given that the State has already      
         legislated comprehensively. The inevitably patchy  
         coverage of the area by the proposed Commonwealth   
         legislation adds to, rather than resolves, the      
         problems raised by IVF and associated matters.

4.19     The Committee is concerned to ensure that the fullest
discussion with the States on its recommendations takes place
and indeed it regards its receipt of the submission from the
Victorian Government as indicating that dialogue is regarded
as essential.

4.20     The Australian Federal system has displayed great
ingenuity in successfully managing to achieve desired results
despite the apparent constitutional difficulties created by the
distribution of legislative powers.

4.21     In addition to simply uniform legislation whereby each
unit in the Federation passes a law achieving the same legal result, 
but confined to matters falling within its constitutional competence, 
other devices have been used. Thus State criminal and civil law can 
apply in `a Commonwealth place' within a State. Again, companies and 
securities legislation passed by the Commonwealth Parliament, after 
approval by the Ministerial Council, comprising Federal and 
State Attorneys-General, automatically applies 
to entities and transactions subject only to State law. The Committee 
is confident that a system can be devised which allows the one set
of ethical principles to apply by force of law to biomedical
experimentation in Australia.

4.22 The Committee favours a national system of accreditation of those institutions within which experimentation on human embryos might take place.

