<sample>
	<id> H14 </id>
	


	<note> 2023 words </note>
	


	<source> New South Wales State Water Plan
Water Policies for the Future. A Report to the Minister for Natural Resources
by the State Water Plan Task Force 
Water Resources Commission, New South Wales </source>
	



	<h>7.2.4     Transfer of Rural Water Allocations </h>
	


	<h> Transfer of Irrigation Surface Water Allocations </h>
	

In a growing economy there is continual autonomous, or natural, adjustment
by businesses to changing circumstances.  Adjustment may mean changing the
proportion of inputs used, the production process, the products produced,
or the location of the production process.  In the long term, industries
will come and go, be prosperous or unprofitable and grow or shrink.  The
steel, coal, irrigated horticulture and dairy industries are all examples
of industries that have undergone major changes in recent times.

By and large, this adjustment process occurs naturally as part of the country's
economic and social development and in response to trading relationships
with the rest of the world. Even so, there are frequent barriers to this
natural process of adjustment - barriers that may not prevent adjustment
occurring altogether but rather that slow it to a degree that causes problems
to emerge.  Typical symptoms of these barriers are low incomes within
identifiable groups and price levels that are much higher in Australia than
for similar products elsewhere.

State and Commonwealth Government policies for the rural sector have, since
the early 1970s, paid significant attention to facilitating adjustment to
change.  The 1980s will continue to see policy emphasis on encouraging the
rural sector to adjust to change.  To do otherwise will only defer adjustment
that would occur eventually anyway and which then would be more costly in
terms of welfare problems and lower economic growth, and which would restrain
the distribution of benefits from change.  Capacity to adjust will be essential
to the irrigation industry as the price of water is increased to reduce
the gap between the revenue and the recurrent costs of the rural water supply
and distribution systems. 

One means of providing farm management flexibility in the face of change,
and of improving the allocation of water, is to allow transfer of water
or water entitlements between irrigators on a rental or a sale (permanent)
basis.

A water transfer scheme can also provide progressive irrigators with the
incentive and the means to substantially improve on-farm efficiency at little
or no financial cost.  By exploiting more water-efficient techniques such
as spray, drip and micro-irrigation and land forming, a proportion of an
irrigator's water allocation could become surplus to requirements.  This
surplus allocation could then be either rented annually or sold to another
irrigator, so providing additional income which could be used to pay-off
the capital invested in the new irrigation techniques and perhaps provide
some additional cash as a reward for more efficient water use.

Further, with the maturity of the water system, resource management, rather
than further development, has become the main avenue for progress in the
industry.  The drought of the early 1980s, one of the worst on record,
reinforced this view by confirming that storages alone could not save
irrigators from prolonged drought.  It is now considered that water management
mechanisms aimed at providing irrigators with greater flexibility in making
use of meagre water supplies might be more effective in alleviating some
of the problems of drought.

From the Water Resources Commission's experience with a trial surface water
transfer scheme introduced for the 1983/84 irrigation season and continued
into the 1984/85 season, there does not appear to be any impediment to allowing
annual water transfers to continue in future.

Annual water transfer arrangements would operate on the basis of the sale
of a `volume' of water rather than the sale of entitlements to water.  In
each case, the water entitlement would remain with the existing licence
holder.  Because water entitlements would not be traded, changes to the
Water and Irrigation Acts are not envisaged.

The annual transfer arrangements could operate much like the existing temporary
scheme with a number of conditions made less restrictive.  In particular,
the transfers would be possible in any season irrespective of the water
supply situation at the commencement of the season.  This is in contrast
to the existing temporary scheme which only allows transfers in most river
valleys if the initial allocation is less than 100 per cent and then limits
the amount available for transfer to the difference between the initial
announced allocation and an irrigator's full allocation.  At this stage,
merit is seen in allowing irrigators to trade up to an amount of water
equivalent to their full allocation in any season.

Permanent transfer of water entitlements (that is, the sale of water
entitlements) is more complex.  First, in order to ensure an effective market,
permanent water entitlements need to be more specific in terms of volume
and more secure in reliability of supply.  The Water Act and the Irrigation
Act would need amendment to allow the present volumetric allocations to
become the legal entitlement in irrigation areas and districts rather than
the now virtually-superseded water right.

Second, permanent water transfers on a large scale may over-tax the supply
capacity in some parts of the river systems, or of channels and drains within
irrigation areas and districts.  There are definite economies in operating
area and district distribution systems at or near full capacity.  Permanent
transfer of water away from any part of this distribution network may erode
these economies, making the systems more costly to operate per unit of
delivered water and, in turn, making water more expensive for the remaining
users.  Significant transfer of water away from any part of the network
may make it both physically and economically impractical to operate.  Further,
a concentration of water use in some localities could exacerbate existing
or potential water logging and salinity problems.

Finally, there is concern by some irrigators in the irrigation areas and
districts that the introduction of marketable transfers will force the small
landholder out of irrigation.  There is also a concern that permanent transfers
could encourage corporate interest in irrigation and, in time, permit
substantial corporate ownership of irrigation area holdings.  It is feared
that this will mean diversion of farm profits and purchases away from local
businesses and have adverse effects on civic and community amenities.  There
is no evidence to support these views.  Marketable transfers are just like
the sale or rental of any other property - the seller/renter does so only
if satisfied with the price or rental.  In this way, ownership of entitlements
to water is similar to land ownership and the ability to trade water or
water entitlements is similar to land transactions.  The relative freedom
from restriction of a large component of the rural land market outside the
irrigation areas has not led to the demise of the family farm and there is
no evidence to suggest that marketable water transfers will increase the
chances of this happening.  More likely, by providing the family farm with
more flexibility to adjust and a means of exchanging capital assets for
cash (either water rental income or proceeds from outright sale), the farm's
and the local community's chances of survival and betterment will be enhanced.

The concept of permanent transfers is definitely worthy of further detailed
consideration.  Permanent transfers are the only means by which long-term
permanent changes in water demand can be accommodated.  Presently, the concept
of permanent transfer is not well accepted by the irrigation community and
there are obvious operational and economic difficulties in its application
in the irrigation areas and districts.  Outside the areas and districts,
licensed pumpers have expressed concern that, in periods of low financial
returns (due to poor seasons or commodity prices), irrigators with substantial
borrowings may be forced to sell some, or all, of their entitlement in order
to meet financial commitments where otherwise financial institutions mostly
would have accommodated their needs.  To safeguard against such a situation,
licensed pumpers argue that annual transfers provide adequate flexibility
in water management.


	<h> Intersectoral Transfers </h>
	

From a standpoint of economic efficiency, there is no reason why water should
not be transferred between distinctly different uses.  Increased economic
efficiency will clearly result from a shift of water from irrigation, which
is a relatively low value use, to other uses such as power generation, town
water and industry where a demand for water for these purposes exists.

It can be argued that such improvements in economic efficiency may be gained
at the expense of income distribution and wealth.  Because the impacts of
major water re-allocation may be significant, these should be quantified
and evaluated before transfers between sectors are permitted.

A major consideration in intersectoral entitlement transfer is the vastly
different capacity to pay of*off buyers from different sectors - industry
and towns will always be able to outbid irrigators.  This provides the party
with the greater capacity to pay with far greater leverage in the bargaining
process, particularly as irrigators generally have imperfect knowledge about
water in alternative uses.  This suggests that intersectoral transfers should
not be by private treaty as in the annual water transfer arrangements. 
Rather the Water Resources Commission could `broker' intersectoral transfers
- buying from irrigators at a capitalized price derived from prevailing
prices for annual irrigation transfers and selling at a price in keeping
with the new users' preparedness to pay.  Agreement to intersectoral
entitlement transfers will require detailed investigation of this and other
aspects and a policy will need to be developed in close consultation with
all interested parties.

Annual transfer arrangements need not prohibit intersectoral transfer. 
Apart from very dry seasons when water sharing arrangements restrict all
sectors, it is doubtful whether there are many other occasions when actual
transfers would be attractive to non-irrigation users.  At times when transfers
may be attractive, short-term policies could be developed in consultation
with all water users and applications to transfer could be assessed on a
case-by-case basis.


	<h> Transfer of Groundwater Allocations </h>
	

The rationale for allowing surface water allocations to be transferred among
users has just been discussed.  A similar rationale applies to groundwater.
Initial allocations for the major aquifers are being determined.  If these
allocations are not transferable, the initial allocations will determine
the long-term efficiency of water use, as the inefficient farm is allocated
the same water as the efficient farm.  In many respects, the relative
efficiency of the initial allocations is not critical provided that
re-allocation can take place over time to achieve optimum efficiency.

Provisions for transferability have been included in the allocation schemes
so far developed.  But transferability of groundwater allocations must be
governed by the physical characteristics of aquifers.  The effects of excessive
withdrawals in some areas, such as local drawdown of water levels, must
be examined before transfers are allowed.  Implicit in this is that the
Water Resources Commission must have adequate knowledge of possible aquifer
behaviour so that quick decisions can be made on whether individual transfers
should be allowed.

Transfers of allocations between different sectors - for example, irrigation
and industry - to meet future demands for water, have*has also been discussed.
For groundwater this is also an option, particularly if the adopted life
of the aquifer is to be adhered to.  However, the nature of groundwater
is quite different to surface water and there are more options available
to meet emerging demands.  Thus, it is best if each situation is examined
case by case to determine the best way to meet these demands.  However,
clear provisions should be available in the legislation to allow both temporary
and permanent transfers of water allocations, subject to physical
characteristics of the aquifer.


	<h> Future Action </h>
	

Given that presently there is little knowledge or understanding of the social,
economic and operational impacts of permanent transfers, the best course
appears to be to allow annual water transfers in any season, regardless
of the surface water supply situation, and to allow irrigators to trade
any volume of water up to the equivalent of their full allocation.
Intersectoral annual transfers should be permitted, although each proposal
to do so should conform with guidelines for such transfers developed by
the Water Resources Commission in consultation with local water users and
other interested parties.

Further investigation must be undertaken of options for permanent transfer of water entitlements of surface water and groundwater. Ultimately, permanent transfer, particularly of surface water, will be essential to reallocate water entitlements to higher value users either within a sector or on an intersectoral basis.


</sample>
