<sample>
	<id> H15 </id>
	


	<note> 2013 words </note>
	


	<source> New South Wales coal resources and reserves </source>
	


	<bl> M Sniffin, P Sayers, J Beckett </bl>
	


	<h>2.1 SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES </h>
	

The aim of this volume is to provide the following information:

‚2 To present the coal resources and reserves for New South Wales
  on a coalfield basis in a useable and concise format.

‚2 To present a general picture of each coalfield and to discuss:
  geology, mining methods, coal seam geology, seam quality, and coal
  utilization in each area.

‚2 To delineate areas of both sterilized or uncategorized coal and
  to discuss the factors which determine this.

The coal resources of the Sydney - Gunnedah Basin were designated
as the primary focus of this study. The smaller coal bearing
provinces of the Oaklands, Gloucester and Ashford Basins have also
been assessed. The Cranky Corner Basin has been included with the
Newcastle Coalfield of the Sydney Basin. Minor coal deposits in the
Clarence-Moreton Basin and the Clyde Coal Measures of the Sydney
Basin have been excluded because of their negligible economic
importance.


	<h>2.2 DEFINITION OF COAL RESOURCE AND RESERVE CATEGORIES </h>
	

The coal resources and reserves contained in each authorisation, 
colliery holding, and other areas not held by title were determined 
by applying the Fifth Edition of the Standing Committee on Coalfield 
Geology of N.S.W. &quot;Code for Calculating Resources and Reserves&quot;, 
(N.S.W. Geological Survey Records 22(1), 1984), which is included 
as Appendix 1.

A national code for reporting coal resources and reserves was
ratified in April 1986 by the Government Geologists Conference and
was adopted in June 1986 by the Standing Committee on Coalfield
Geology of N.S.W. This code, referred to as the &quot;Australian Code
for Reporting Identified Coal Resources and Reserves&quot; makes
provision for two classes of Inferred Resources; Class 1 which is
equivalent to the Assumed category of the Code presented herein,
and Class 2 Inferred Resources. The Class 2 category is broadly
equivalent to the previous category of Inferred Resources. The
majority of the coal resource data was supplied prior to
ratification of the 1986 national code and consequently resources
within this document are reported according to the 1984 &quot;Code for
Calculating Coal Resources and Reserves&quot;.

Coal resources for each coalfield in New South Wales have been
categorized according to the level of confidence to which they have
been assessed. This confidence level is dependent upon the density
of exploration data available and the extrapolation of information
from these points of observation (Figure 2.1). Definitions for each
category (i.e. Measured, Indicated, Assumed and Inferred) are given
in Appendix 1.

Coal reserves in this publication are reported in categories of
Recoverable and Marketable Reserves. These estimates are obtained
only from the calculated Measured and Indicated Resources and then
only when a mine plan exists for the extraction of the coal.
Consequently, the Recoverable and Marketable (saleable) Reserves
often represent only a small proportion of the reported coal
resources.

Application of this code allows the various categories of Measured
to Inferred Resources and Recoverable to Marketable Reserves in
each coalfield to be grouped on a mining method and depth of cover
basis. Additional criteria for seam thickness and coal quality are
incorporated into this assessment as shown in Table 2.1.


	<note> TABLE </note>
	

In this report, potential open cut coal resources are defined
as coal which occurs at depths of less than 300 metres and with
a linear overburden to coal thickness ratio (stripping ratio)
of less than 10:1. Although mine plans exist for deep open cut
deposits, coal is presently being mined to a limit of
approximately 150 metres when the stripping ratio is 6:1 or
less. Most current open cut mines in New South Wales range from
60 to 80 metres deep with stripping ratios ranging from 5:1 to
7:1.

The majority of underground mines in the State are operating
at depths of less than 300 metres where linear overburden to
coal thickness ratios exceed 10:1. The minimum mineable working
thickness is usually 1.5 metres which allows miners and
machinery to operate comfortably. Most underground mining in
New South Wales is by bord and pillar methods using continuous
miners to extract the coal, but an increasing number of
longwall units are being installed in the Southern, Western and
Newcastle Coalfields. In 1984/85 twelve longwall units were in
operation with an additional two installed in the latter part
of the year. The average output per unit/shift totalled 1,547
tonnes compared with 337 tonnes for the 238 continuous miners
in use.

Increasing amounts of underground recoverable coal are being
explored for and mined in the 300 to 600 metres depth category.
This is especially true in the Southern Coalfield which
contains the only source of premium hard coking coal in New
South Wales and therefore mining at great depths is
economically feasible. However, it is considered that the 600
metres &quot;economic&quot; depth limit which is presently applied to the
reporting of resources will be increased in the future.

Large areas within most of the major coalfields are poorly
explored and data are insufficient to allow resources to be
reported according to any of the categories defined in Appendix
1. Coal resources in these areas have been grouped as either
&quot;uncategorized&quot; with an estimate given of the total in situ
resources or as &quot;sterilized&quot; with reasons given for this
description.

The reporting of coal resources and reserves in this report is
limited to the criteria which are outlined in Table 2.1. In
addition to this, resources and reserves for each coalfield are
divided into authorisation areas and colliery holdings. Where
possible, individual coal seam names are identified, otherwise
resources and reserves are quoted by formation or subgroup
categories.

This study represents the collation of all available coal
resource data from current coal exploration authorisations,
exploration permits, unallocated areas, and colliery holdings
in New South Wales.


	<h>2.3 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS </h>
	

The Joint Coal Board collected and assessed resource and
reserve data from the colliery holdings. All other information
referred to above was assessed by the Coal Geology Branch of
the Department of Mineral Resources. Statistics used in the
diagrams were compiled from preliminary tables of the Joint
Coal Board statistical yearbook &quot;Black Coal in Australia 1985-
86&quot;. The overall assimilation of data, writing of text,
preparation for publication, and editorial responsibility was
conducted by the authors. Acknowledgement to the following
persons is made for their time and effort in compiling the
enormous amount of material which went into preparing this
report: C. Barto was responsible for contacting companies and
assembling the coal resource and reserve data; M. Ives, B.
Kirby and C. Shekhar, geologists with the Joint Coal Board,
supplied the colliery holding data; N. Clarke and P. West
contributed information for same of the chapters. Overall
editorial comment and advice was the responsibility of A.
Galligan. D. Fitzmaurice, K. McDonald, G. Stewart, and A. Valja
drafted the figures for the text, while photographs were
supplied by D. Barnes and M. Sniffin. The manuscript was typed
by A. Pagano.


	<h>3.1 INTRODUCTION </h>
	

Eight important coal rich areas are discussed in this report.
They are the Western, Hunter, Newcastle, and Southern
Coalfields of the Sydney Basin; the Gunnedah Coalfield of the
Gunnedah Basin, and the Gloucester, Oaklands, and Ashford
Basins. The Cranky Corner Basin is included as part of the
Newcastle Coalfield.

The locations of these coalfields are shown in Figure 3.1.
Minor coal bearing sequences in the Clarence-Moreton Basin and
the Clyde Coal Measures of the Sydney Basin are excluded from
this report.

The boundaries used for the coalfields of the Sydney-Gunnedah
Basin are those adopted by the Standing Committee on Coalfield
Geology of N.S.W., (N.S.W. Geological Survey Records 22(1),
1985).

Table 3.1 is presented here to show a broad stratigraphic
correlation of the major coalfields and coal-bearing basins
in New South Wales. As exploration continues and more data are
analyzed, the accuracy of correlation and definition of
stratigraphic boundaries will continue to improve.

The Sydney-Gunnedah Basin contains the majority of coal
resources in New South Wales. It extends for up to 500
kilometres in a northwesterly direction from Ulladulla in the
south to beyond Narrabri in the north.

The coal bearing rocks of the Sydney-Gunnedah Basin are Permian
in age. Overlying rocks of Triassic age or younger generally
form prominent scarps, particularly in the Western and Southern
Coalfields. Mining methods, either open cut or underground, are
often dictated by the presence of this younger cover.

The coalfields of the Sydney - Gunnedah Basin offer a broad
variety of coal types and these are outlined in Table 3.2.
Quality ranges from low volatile matter, hard coking coal, to
high quality, low ash thermal coals. Most of the coal produced
in New South Wales is beneficiated by washing. Depending upon
market requirements, different coal types may be recovered from
the one coal seam. In addition, many coal types are produced
by blending different coals at the port where stackers and
reclaimers can achieve a specified product.

Relevant information about geology, inherent quality, mining
methods, and production from each coalfield is presented in the
following discussion. A more detailed assessment, including the
coal resources and reserves, is given in the individual
coalfield chapters.


	<note> TABLE </note>
	


	<h>3.2 WESTERN COALFIELD </h>
	

The Western Coalfield (Figure 3.1) is bounded to the west by
the western limits of Permian Coal Measures subcrop. It adjoins
the Gunnedah, Hunter and Southern Coalfields to the north, east
and south respectively.

The main coal bearing strata are contained in the Illawarra
Coal Measures. The major seams in the southern and northern
areas of the Western Coalfield are:

          
	<note> list </note>
	

The Illawarra Coal Measures are overlain by thick Triassic
sandstone (Narrabeen Group) over most of the southern area.
Coal is mined primarily using underground mining methods.
Currently 13 underground mines and two open cut mines are in
operation.

The Western Coalfield contains substantial resources of high
specific energy thermal coal. Both domestic and export power
generation and cement industry markets are supplied. Quality
characteristics of the major seams as mined (Lithgow, Katoomba,
Ulan) typically yield coals with medium to high ash, low to
moderate sulphur, and medium to high volatile matter content.

Production in 1985/86 from the 14 collieries in the Western
Coalfied totalled 13.8 million tonnes raw coal (Joint Coal
Board figures). A large part of this production came from the
Ulan open cut operation (6 million tonnes) and the Clarence
Mine (1.6 million tonnes).


	<h>3.3 HUNTER COALFIELD </h>
	

The Hunter Coalfield is bounded to the northeast by the Hunter
Thrust System. It adjoins*ajoins the Newcastle, Southern,
Western and Gunnedah Coalfields to the east, south, west, and
north respectively (Figure 3.1).

The coal resources of the Hunter Coalfield are contained
primarily in the Wittingham and Greta Coal Measures. Up to 60
coal seams occur in the region, the most important of which are
listed below:

        
	<note> lists </note>
	

In terms of both coal resources and current production, the
Hunter Coalfield is the largest of the State's coalfields. Most
of the coal occurs at comparatively shallow depths and
consequently production is primarily from large scale multi-
seam open cut mines.

Currently 13 open cut mines and 7 underground mines are in
operation in the Hunter Coalfield. Five coal lease application
areas are also pending, and exploration in 34 coal
authorisation areas is actively assessing the resource
potential of the coalfield.

Both export and domestic markets are supplied from the Hunter
Coalfield. Several different coal types are produced which
include:

‚2 Low ash, medium volatile matter content, soft coking coal for
  export.

‚2 Low to medium ash, medium to high volatile matter content,
  low sulphur thermal coal for export.

‚2 Medium to high ash, medium volatile matter content, low sulphur
  coal for domestic power generation.

Most of the export coal is washed and much of it is blended into 
commercial blends of high and consistent quality.

Raw coal production from the Hunter Coalfield during 1985/86 totalled
28.8 million tonnes. Underground production totalled 4.9 million tonnes
while open cut production was 23.9 million tonnes. This represents 37
per cent of the total coal production in the state of New South Wales.


	<h>3.4   NEWCASTLE COALFIELD </h>
	

The Newcastle Coalfield extends along the coast of New South Wales from
the Hawkesbury River in the south to the edge of the Hunter Thrust fault
system in the north.


</sample>
