<sample>
	<id> H16 </id>
	


	<note> 2006 words </note>
	


	<source> Draft coastal management plan  Shire of Coorow </source>
	


	<bl> By L. A. Lobry de Bruyn </bl>
	


	<h>2.5	2.5	COASTAL PROCESSES</h>
	


	<h>2.5.1	Introduction </h>
	

	For any firm conclusions to be made on coastal processes one would need
	quantitative data on wind, wave and tide regimes, beach near-shore
	morphology, and the sediment budget for each bay. However, the above
	data are not available for the project area. The following techniques
	were the only ones available which could be used to deduct
	coastal processes. The techniques are aerial photographical
	interpretation, qualitative observation, extension of studies completed
	in adjacent areas and the educated opinion of resident coastal
	geomorphologists.


	<h>2.5.2	Winds </h>
	

	Summer winds are generally easterlies in the morning and become
	south-south westerlies in the afternoon. The dominant winds are south
	westerlies which blow mostly between 11 kph and 30 kph. It is believed
	that wind speeds greater than 10 kph are responsible for sand movement
	(Wood and Grieve, 1978). In winter, wind direction may vary from the
	north west through to the south. The Bureau of Meteorology wind records
	indicate the main direction and speed of the winds at Jurien Bay (the
	closest meteorological station to the project area).

	During the passage of a tropical cyclone the wind direction may vary but
	usually they are north to north westerlies.


	<h>2.5.3	Waves </h>
	

	The coastline is dominated by two major wave forms - swell and wind
	waves. Swell waves are generally propagated from the south-west but
	their direction may be altered, as they approach the coast, by offshore
	features such as reefs and islands or due to extensions of the shoreline
	by using structures such as jetties. The swell waves are diffracted and
	reflected and break on the beach parallel to the shoreline. Waves
	refract and bend towards the headlands because of the offshore shoal
	area associated with the headland. The wave energy is therefore
	concentrated on the headland, and the wave heights there may be several
	times as large as in the adjacent embayments.


	<h>2.5.4	Tides </h>
	

	The project area on a world scale consists of a mixed tidal regime that
	is predominantly either diurnal or semi-diurnal (Davies, 1980). In the
	mixed tidal regime there are two highs and two lows per day which are
	not of the same magnitude. The tidal range is low and at the spring
	tides the tidal range is approximately less than 2 m. Since the tidal
	range is low in the project area the influence of tide-induced currents
	is limited to constrictions between islands and around headlands.


	<h>2.5.5	Sediment Budget </h>
	

	There are various inputs and outputs in the sediment budget. The inputs
	consist of littoral drift in, onshore transport, and cliff erosion,
	while the outputs are littoral drift out, offshore transport and dune
	migration. Each of the above components will briefly be discussed
	(FIGURE 2).

        
	<note> FIGURE </note>
	

	The term &quot;sink&quot; is used to cover all those processes whereby sediment is
	lost to the coastal system. The first sink is represented by the
	migration of dunes inland where they can no longer be acted on by waves
	at times of storm activity and the second by transport offshore onto the
	seafloor.

	Parabolic dunes seem to develop when the dune is no longer receiving new
	sand and begins to wander inland. As the dune travels, the sand body at
	the head is progressively exhausted and the two trailing edges develop
	into long slightly converging ridges. The development of such a sequence
	requires not only time but the frequent occurrence of high velocity
	winds from one major direction. In the project area the wind transport
	is mainly from the south-south west so that the parabolic dunes are
	orientated in a north-south direction. The natural development of dunes
	depends on a fortuitous sequence of events and circumstances.

	Transport of sediment occurs in conjunction with nearshore cell
	circulation and littoral drift. The nearshore cell circulation consists
	of rip currents and feeding longshore currents and is normally generated
	by variations in the wave breaker height along the length of the beach.
	The longshore variations in wave height may be produced either by wave
	refraction causing divergence and convergence of the wave rays or by
	edge waves trapped in the nearshore interacting with normal swell waves.
	Alternative explanations for nearshore circulation have been developed
	by Hino (1975) and Sonu (1972). Longshore currents may also be produced
	by waves breaking at an angle to the shoreline. Exactly what processes
	cause longshore currents in the project area can not be ascertained.

	However, longshore movement of sediment at any beach is the sum of
	transport under all the individual wave trains arriving at the shore
	from numerous wave generation areas. The beaches in the project area
	have north-south orientations and during summer sand may move northward
	for a time due to waves arriving from the south to south-west and then
	later move to the south in winter under waves coming from the north.

	The result of north and south longshore drift is a net dominance of the
	northward transport system. Thus a small amount of sediment is
	continually being moved to the north. This phenomenon is responsible for
	the asymmetric growth of beach ridge plains and erosion on their
	southern flanks.


	<h>2.5.6	Shoreline Stabiity and Coastal Erosion </h>
	

	The recession hazard can be categorised into two main types which pose
	significantly different problems to the coastal planner - the beach sand
	cycle and secular recession.

	
	<h> Beach Sand Cycle </h>
	

	The commonly perceived definition of the beach is the interface between
	the ocean and the land at a particular instant. In reality, this zone is
	not static but varies within a definable zone depending on the existing
	weather conditions. During storm events the back beach escarpment will
	move landward as sand is moved offshore to form storm bars which
	dissipate the wave energy. In contrast, during periods of calm weather
	the sand gradually moves back onshore from the bar, rebuilding the beach
	and an incipient foredune. The term used to describe the area which
	encompasses the accreted and storm profile is the dynamic swept prism
	(Chapman and Smith, 1980). This situation does not involve any nett loss
	of sediment from the beach system. However, if development is allowed
	within this dynamic swept prism it may be threatened or lost during a
	severe event (FIGURE 3).

	
	<h> Secular Recession </h>
	

	Secular recession is an ongoing landward movement of the erosion
	escarpment associated with an average sediment loss from the coastal
	compartment. Therefore to assess or predict shoreline stability various
	techniques could be used (May et al., 1983). However, sediment budgets
	are generally used to assess the medium term stability of the shoreline.
	No such investigations have been completed for the area. From
	preliminary investigation (29-31 May) of the project area the northern
	ends of the crescentic, sandy bays appear to have wider beach widths and
	are backed by a series of beach ridges. Thus, one could assume that the
	northern ends of the bays are prograding or at least have been
	prograding in the past. However, these areas also have consolidated
	parabolic dunes indicating periods of high sand influx and instability.
	Hence, shoreline instability results from an inbalance between sediment
	removal and sediment supply to the coast. The natural beach exhibits
	short-term fluctuations which are in dynamic equilibrium while over a
	greater period of time it may be prograding or receding.

	
	<h> Beach Erosion </h>
	

	Woods (1984) placed the project area into Region 5 (Kalbarri to Cape
	Naturaliste). This section of coastline is characterised by long, sandy
	beaches and rocky limestone headlands, reefs and islands. The sandy
	bays are crescent-shaped and are orientated towards the north.

	The modal form of the beaches in the project area is extremely low
	energy due to the presence of offshore islands and reefs. However, the
	area does experience high energy conditions with the passage of
	extra-tropical cyclones across the coastline. During the field trip
	(29-31 May) minor erosion was observed. For example scarping or
	cliffing along the foredune South of Leeman, erosional cusping along
	the summer berm at South Bay and vast accumulations of seaweed. Erosion
	was more prominent along the southern and central portions of the sandy
	bays. The beaches at South Bay, Squatter Settlement 1, south of and
	including Dynamite Bay, north of Leeman and Green Head jetty are
	showing evidence of erosion. Old dunes are progressively being cut
	back, bench marks have been exposed and there is scarping as well as
	erosional cusping along the sandy bays. At Squatter Settlement 1
	(closest to Green Head) and north of Green Head jetty the erosional
	events are not as recent as vegetation has recolonised the dune system
	and there is a layer of humus underlaying the vegetation. In contrast,
	where the foredunes are low or non existent the beaches are more stable
	and are probably prograding. Most of the erosional activity is
	asssociated with activities such as tracking, off road vehicles, and
	squatter settlement.


	<h>2.6	GEOMORPHOLOGY </h>
	

	Hesp and Gozzard (1983) have included the project area within a
	description and land use capability study of coastal lands from Dongara
	to Green Head. They identified seven geomorphic units within the area.
	The units are Pleistocene Barrier complex, Deflation basins, Parabolic
	dunes, Active parabolic dunes and blowouts, foredunes and beach. These
	geomorphic units are the result of a complex interaction between
	geology, climate, vegetation, soils and coastal processes.

	The geomorphology of the area was mapped by aerial photographic
	interpretation at 1:25 000 scale using 1978 aerial photographs. To
	check the reliability of the aerial photographic interpretation a field
	reconnaissance of the area was conducted by Hesp and Gozzard (1983).
	The main characteristic of each geomorphic unit is outlined below
	(FIGURE 4).

	
	<h> Pleistocene Barrier Complex </h>
	

	This geomorphic unit is equivalent to Tamala limestone which outcrops
	extensively to form rocky headlands and pools as well as submarine
	shelf chains and islands. The barrier complex consists of cemented
	aeolian calcarenite (limestone) and is often covered by a veneer of
	Safety Bay Sand.

	
	<h> Parabolic Dunes </h>
	
	
	The geological equivalent of the parabolic dunes is the Quindalup dune
	system. The parabolic dune system represents more recent (Holocene)
	activity which has camouflaged the Pleistocene dune ridge complex. They
	are orientated in a north-south direction (parallel to the coast) which
	is the dominant wind direction. Active Parabolic Dune lobes and
	blowouts are at South Bay and north of Green Head. They are usually
	formed during periods of high sand influx and are later cutoff by
	vegetation recolonisation when the sand supply decreases. The active
	parabolic dune lobes continue to advance (approximately 1-9 m/yr) in a
	northern direction.

	
	<h> Deflation Basins </h>
	

	These areas are the flat and gently undulating erosion plains which are
	bounded by the active and inactive parabolic dunes.

	
	<h> Foredune </h>
	

	This unit may be made up of active and relic beach ridges. The ridges
	are asymmetric and can be vegetated or semi-vegetated. The geological
	equivalent is Safety Bay Sand and in some sections Quindalup Sand.

	
	<h> Beach </h>
	

	The beach is the active surf/swash zone and is a highly dynamic process
	area.


	<h>2.7	TERRESTRIAL FAUNA </h>
	


	<h>2.7.1	Mammals and Birds </h>
	

	Chapman et al. (1977) completed a case study of the Cockleshell Gully
	Reserve which is included in the project*theproject area. Chapman and
	Kitchener (1977) found thirteen native mammals and six exotic mammals.
        An annotated list of mammals is included in APPENDIX 1. With the 
        exception of Sminthopsis granulipes all mammal species recorded in this
        survey were previously known to inhabit the west coastal sand heaths 
        between Moore and Murchison Rivers.

	In contrast to the mammalian community the birdlife of the area is rich
	and diverse. There have been a total of 146 species of birds recorded
	from the area.

	The Cockleshell Gully area is relatively undisturbed by clearing or
	mining and therefore it is of considerable importance in maintaining
	large breeding populations of birds. Thus, the area is viewed as &quot;the
	most important portion of the southwest for conserving coastal passerine
	birds&quot; (Dell and Johnstone, 1977).

	The area is very rich in heath-dwelling species. The genus Malurus is
	represented by four species, and the genera Stipiturus, Sericornis,
	Calamanthus and Acanthiza are present. Similarly, the islands of the
	area, especially the Fishermen Islands, are important breeding grounds
	for nine species of sea birds and waders.


</sample>
