More lambs from feed and chemical treatments By K. P. Croker, Research Officer, Sheep and Wool Branch  

The ovulation rate, or the number of eggs shed per ovulating ewe, represents the
upper limit of the capacity of a flock of ewes to produce lambs. Several methods
can be used to increase ovulation rates and lambing percentages of ewes,
including selection for better breeding, feeding and the use of chemicals.

The potential for improving the reproductive performance of Western Australia's
ewe flocks by the use of different approaches to breeding was discussed by L.G.
Butler and R.P. Lewer in the Journal of Agriculture in 1983.

This article mainly discusses the research conducted by the Department of
Agriculture's Sheep and Wool Branch on the supplementary feeding of ewes with
sweet narrow-leafed lupin seed (Lupinus angustifolius) and the more recent
investigations of the technique of immunisation to change the levels of some of
the sex hormones in ewes. Both methods can increase ovulation rates and
subsequent lambing percentages.

 Improved nutrition  
Farmers can give ewes more nutritious feed before and at joining to increase
ovulation rates.

 Flushing  
Ewes can be flushed to improve their lambing performances by placing them on a
high plane of nutrition before the start of joining. This practice has long been
used by farmers.

Many experiments on flushing ewes in this way in Western Australia and elsewhere
have shown that both increasing ewe liveweight, as well as the liveweight at
mating, influence ovulation rate and lambing performance.

Research at Beverley, Western Australia, as early as 1941 showed that more twin
lambs were born to Merino x Border Leicester crossbred ewes grazing a paddock
with oaten stubble and unharvested field peas for seven weeks, starting two weeks
before the entire rams were joined with them in mid December (Table 1).

Although it appears that flushing flocks produces only small gains when the ewes
are in good body condition, there does not seem to be any valid reason for
reducing the liveweight amd condition of ewes before starting to feed them up
again.

The body condition of ewes at joining, which is an assessment of fatness as
distinct from liveweight, also influences lambing performances. Ewes gaining in
body condition have higher ovulation rates. Therefore, ewes should be managed so
that they are in good body condition at the start of joining. Farmers can do this
by adjusting stocking rates to increase the amount of paddock feed available to
ewes.

In Western Australia's major sheep-grazing areas the quantity as well as quality
of paddock feed gradually deteriorates after pastures dry off. Because of these
changes to paddock feed, larger increases in lambing percentages would be
expected from ewes flushed in January and February. By then, ewes often have lost
weight and condition.

However, there are no experimental results indicating that this is a better time
to flush ewes rather than in November and December.

 Feeding sweet lupin seed  
In the early 1970s research at the University of Western Australia and the
Department of Agriculture showed that feeding ewes sweet narrow-leafed lupin
seed at joining could increase ovulation rates and lambing performances. It was
suggested that feeding lupin seed, which contains about 30 per cent crude 
protein, overcame the low levels of protein in dry pastures thought to be 
responsible for the poor lambing percentages that are common in the 
agricultural area. Apart from containing high levels of protein and energy, 
sweet lupins are a safe supplement to feed to ewes who readily eat the seeds 
once they are familiar with them.

The degree of response in ovulation rate was related to the amount of lupin seed
eaten. More consistent results were obtained with daily supplements of 250 grams
per head or more (Table 2).

These early experiments in the 1970s showed that there was a positive
relationship between ovulation rate and the number of ewes which lambed when
lupins were fed to them during joining. By increasing ovulation rate, more ewes
lambed and more twins were born.

Ewes seem to respond to lupin supplements soon after feeding starts. In an
experiment at Merredin ovulation rate increased eight days after feeding lupins
(Table 3). Independent research at the University of Western Australia showed
that ovulation could be increased after only six days of feeding. Therefore, it
would appear that ovulation rate can be increased without measurable changes in
liveweight because these feeding periods are too short for significant changes in
weight.

The results from the initial experiments also indicated that 2.5-year-old ewes
were not as responsive to lupin supplements as were older ewes. It was
subsequently shown that ovulation in 1.5-year-old ewes was not increased after
feeding either 250 or 500 g of lupins per head per day. Ovulation rates of
2.5-year-old ewes increased only when 500 g of lupins per head per day were fed,
whereas older ewes showed increases in ovulation at both feeding rates (Table
4).

Other research by the University of Western Australia at Northam during the
spring, summer and autumn of 1975-76 showed that when ewes were fed 750 g of
lupins per head per day ovulation rates increased in October, January and
February, but not in December. In contrast, observations by the Department at
Beverley on ewes which received 250 or 500 g of lupins per head per day over
similar periods in 1975-76 and 1976-77 showed no consistent effect of season on
ovulation rates, although there were slight, but not statistically significant,
increases in the ewes fed the bigger amount. These ewes produced more twins.
Perhaps more lupin seed is necessary to obtain consistently large ovulation
responses at the various times of joining.

Results from the Department's experiments between 1972 to 1977 were examined.
They indicated that ovulation rates and lambing performances of ewes 3.5 years
and older could be economically increased by feeding the equivalent of 250 g of
lupins per head per day to `teased' ewes for 14 days before the entire rams were
joined with them and until day 17 of joining.

 On-farm trials  
The potential application of this method was examined on 50 farms and with 22
800 mature ewes in the agricultural area between 1977 and 1982. Three series of
trials compared the lambing performances of unsupplemented flocks with those fed
lupins.

In the first series, the supplemented ewes received 250 g of lupins per head per
day. Because these trials showed a large variation in responses to lupin
supplements, a second series was conducted in which nearly all trials had an
additional group which received a daily supplement of 500 g of lupins per head.
In the last series of trials, ewes on properties which had marked 60 per cent or
fewer lambs during the preceding five years were fed lupins at 250 g per head per
day to determine whether worthwhile increases in lambing percentages were
obtained.

The overall results from these on-farms studies did not show any significant
increase in the lambing performances of the supplemented ewes. As was found at
Beverley, there was no difference in response between the various times of
joining. However, there was a large variation between farms in the differences
between the unsupplemented and supplemented ewes in the percentage of lambs
born, ranging from 14 per cent fewer lambs born to the supplemented ewes in one
trial to 21 per cent more lambs born to these ewes. Increasing the supplementary
feeding rate to 500 g per head per day did not overcome the variability in the
lambing response.

In the third series of trials where the properties were selected on the basis of
previous poor lambing performances, the unsupplemented ewes had good lambing
figures (93 per cent lambs born). Perhaps, as a result, this is the reason that
supplementation did not significantly increase the percentage of lambs born.

The results from the on-farm trials may be associated with a potential clover
disease problem. In series 1 and 2 trials, the best results were obtained from
the Bunbury area where it had been previously shown that sub-clinical clover
disease depressed lambing performances of ewes. The results obtained from this
area and, for comparison, those from Merredin, a non-clover pasture area, are
shown in Table 5.

On the properties in the Bunbury area less than 80 per cent of ewes lambed
whereas in the Merredin area between 88 and 94 per cent of ewes lambed. However,
the apparent association of large responses to lupin supplements where
subterranean clover pastures may depress lambing percentages has not been
examined experimentally, so that confirmation is still required.

 A place for lupins?  
Although the Department of Agriculture has conducted many experiments between
1972 and 1982 on feeding sweet lupin seed to ewes to increase ovulation rates
and lambing percentages, it is still not possible to recommend that lupins be
used to improve lambing performances on all farms. The major problem is
determining which ewe flocks can be supplemented successfully and what causes
the tremendous variability in the lambing performances of flocks after
supplementation. This is the basis of our search for the components of lupins
which affect ovulation rates, as discussed in `Ovulation rate of ewes - role of
energy and protein' on page 36.

 Chemicals  
A range of pharmaceutical products is available which can influence the
reproductive efficiency of sheep. Of relevance here are those which can increase
ovulation rates and so provide an opportunity to improve the lambing percentages
of flocks.

 PMSG  
Pregnant mare serum gonadotrophin (PMSG) can be used to stimulate an ewe's
ovaries directly. According to the dosage given, it can produce moderate or very
high ovulation rates.

There are several problems with the use of PMSG. It must be used either in
conjunction with techniques which synchronise oestrous or with the careful
monitoring of natural oestrous. It must be injected on the 12th to 14th day of
the oestrous cycle. The hormone is expensive and adds considerably to the cost
of production. Also the response to it are highly variable, both within and
between ewes.

PMSG can only be obtained on a veterinarian's prescription.

 Immunisation against ovarian hormones  
After the discovery in the early 1970s that ovulation rates of ewes were
increased when they were immunised against the sex hormones oestrone (a female
hormone) and androstenedione (a male hormone), CSIRO developed a new method of
producing more twins from ewes. The ewes are injected with a hormone-protein
compound that will stimulate antibody production. The antibodies neutralise some
of the naturally circulating sex hormones, which results in the release of two
eggs instead of one in some ewes.

An important part of the development of this technique has been to find what
level of antibody production is needed to stimulate above-normal lambing
performances without the harmful side-effect of having triplets or quadruplets.

The first experiments with the immunising compounds were conducted by CSIRO at
Armidale, New South Wales, in 1977-78 and led to significant increases in
ovulation.

Evaluation of the compounds started in Western Australia in 1980 because the
strain of Merino and the field environment here differ from those examined by
CSIRO.

The initial experiments were conducted on the Department's Wongan Hills Research
Station with Merino ewes which were 2.5-years-old when first immunised. The
results are shown in the figures. During these investigations, CSIRO's
scientists were `tailoring' the compounds (immunogens) and procedures to give
the right biological response. Hence, there were slight differences between
experiments. However, in this State injections of the immunogens increased
ovulation rates and resulted in more lambs being born.

In late 1983 an anti-androstenedione compound which had been developed under an
agreement between CSIRO and Glaxo Australia Pty Ltd was released commercially as
Fecundin ®. Subsequently, the Department began to evaluate the responses to
immunisation with Fecundin ® of Merino and crossbred ewes on commercial
properties.

 On-farm trials  
In 1984 crossbred ewes on properties at Moora and Rosa Glen and Merino ewes on
properties at Darkan, Jingalup and Chowerup were treated.

At Moora the ovulation rate of the untreated ewes was 1.31 whereas it was
increased to 1.77 in the immunised ewes, but only 9 per cent more lambs were
marked in the immunised ewes.

