<sample>
	<id> H21 </id>
	


	<note> 2008 words </note>
	


	<source> Department of Foreign Affairs Annual Report 1984-85. Senate. 19 February, 1986 </source>
	

Senator SANDERS (Tasmania) (5.11 ) - I move:
     That the Senate take note of the paper.

I note that on page 1 of the annual report for the Department
of Foreign Affairs it says:

     The Department of Foreign Affairs is concerned with
foreign policy advice implementation ...

The report goes on to describe this in detail. I point out that
either the Department is failing in its function or perhaps the
Government is simply not listening to its advice. In fact, the
Government seems to be unaware of much of what is going on in
the world. I refer honourable senators to a question I asked
yesterday in the Senate regarding the policy of the United
States of America, the avowed policy of Admiral James Watkins
who, in the proceedings of the United States Naval Institute,
said that the United States policy was to destroy Soviet
nuclear missile submarines at the outset of a conventional
war. I asked a question about the Government's awareness of
this policy and its significance, particularly to North West
Cape, which, of course, would give the first strike orders. The
Minister representing the Minister for Defence, Senator Gareth
Evans, said:

     However, it appears that this is not a definite agreed
policy but rather the canvassing of one among many
possibilities open to the United States of America in the event
of a conventional conflict with the USSR. Certainly, the
Australian Government -

this is the important part -

is well aware of these and other developments, actual and
possible, in the United States strategic doctrine. To the
extent that the proposal has been canvassed in the way that it
has been by Admiral Watkins, it would be fair to say, from an
Australian defence analysis point of view, that the wisdom of
such a strategy appears to us to be questionable. To attack
Soviet strategic nuclear submarines during a major conventional
conflict would appear to increase further what would already
be a high risk of escalation to nuclear war

That I agree with. It turns out, in spite of that definitive
statement by the honourable senator, that the United States
policy is in fact other than he stated. It turns out that in
Australia the Australian Government - I hope the Department
of Foreign Affairs is not involved in this lack of awareness
- is simply unaware of United States policies pertaining to
this area, to our very own part of the world. Although Senator
Evans said that this was not a policy of the United States, in
yesterday's Press, namely, the Herald, is a headline: `Sub
attack &quot;Key&quot; to U.S. strategy'. The article states:
WASHINGTON, Reuter - U.S. ships and planes would quickly hunt
down Soviet missile submarines if a conventional war broke out
between them, Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger said.

I think that someone is amiss in this country - the Government
or the Department of Foreign Affairs, although I think it is
more the Government's fault - because we are forced to learn
what the attitude of the United States towards our area is by
reading the newspapers. The United States did not bother to
tell the Government of this major shift in policy which, in
fact, was foreshadowed in the report by Admiral Watkins. The
United States did not bother to tell Australia that North West
Cape would be essential to the first strike hunting down of
Russian nuclear submarines in the event of conventional
warfare in Europe. This is not the first time this has
happened. We have seen it over and over again. One very
important example of this was in 1971 when Prime Minister
McMahon attacked the visit of Opposition Leader Whitlam to
China as offensive to the United States, because he was
unaware that Henry Kissinger was in China arranging a visit by
Nixon, which was announced while Whitlam was still in China.
It is time this country demanded that it be told what the
United States has in mind for our area and not be forced to
read about it in the Press of this country.

     Senator MASON (New South Wales) (5.16) - There are
several points I want to make in regard to the 1984-85 annual
report of the Department of Foreign Affairs. My first point is
that, as a member of the parliamentary delegation which
visited China last year, I cannot praise too highly the spirit
of enterprise and enthusiasm I found among our diplomats in
that country. China is probably the most important foreign post
we have, in many respects, and it is essential that we get
things right there where our work is concerned, especially
after such a long period in our history when we did not get
things right as far as China was concerned. Looking back, I
would especially like to commend to this Parliament the
dedication, hard work and intelligence of the head of mission
at that time, Mr Denis Argall, who I think at great loss to
Australia was not able to complete his term as Ambassador but
was forced to return to Australia last August because of ill
health. I wish him a speedy recovery and I hope that his
knowledge of China and the enthusiasm he showed will again be
available somewhere in the service of Australia.

     The delegation was able to meet with Mr Hu Yaobang in
Beijing. I was struck by the firmness with which Mr Hu insisted
that China intended to persist with its open door policy of co-
operation in trade and joint ventures with other countries
- a virtual open door as dramatic as the one that Japan made
at the time of Commodore Perry. It was certainly in vivid
contrast with what I found when I visited China in 1975,
towards the end of the Cultural Revolution. I stress this
matter because I believe that many Australians do not yet
understand how much China has changed and what great trade
opportunities exist there for Australia, but, I would say, on
a hard-headed, businesslike basis because the Chinese are
certainly hard-headed enough. That was our experience of them.

     Before I went to China, I remember, someone said to me:
`What a terrific opportunity it would be if we gave every
Chinese one of a pair of Australian woollen socks, as they
would then have to buy the other half of the pair and that
would be a tremendous breakthrough'. I now hasten to assure
that person that the Chinese would immediately trade off a sock
so that half of them would have a complete pair of socks. That
is the way it is. The Chinese market is available only to
Australian business which is adaptable and which is able to
supply a good product at a competitive price. However, it is
a market that is well worth that kind of effort. It is the
world's biggest market, bigger than it has ever been before,
and interestingly enough - this is one of the main impressions
I think one gets of that country and an impression which our
diplomats stress to us again and again - Chinese society is
now turning acquisitive.

     After the years and years during the Mao era during which
the people could not have things - during which time I saw
them going through department stores looking wistfully at
consumer goods which they could not afford - they are now
reaching the stage where incomes are going up, especially
because of the incentive situation, and where there is a
market. It is a market which particularly we in Australia can
get into. The reason for that is that, as far as I can see, the
Chinese Government is in favour of Australia. We are a small
or middle country. We have never been colonists. We have never
really been in a position which would excite the Chinese to any
kind of opposition ideologically. That gives us a much more
important advantage in China, where ideology is still
important, than we might understand. There is already a large
number of Australian companies operating effectively,
efficiently and profitably in China.

     I ask the Australian Government even if it feels that it
has undertaken a public relations campaign among business and
the community generally, to ensure that there is a good and up
to date understanding of that country. Almost any effort we can
make is worth while. As an example, it is striking that the
greater part of the earnings of a Chinese worker are in the
form of incentives which are assessed regularly on his
reliability and energy. The principal of paying people the same
whether they work hard or not has disappeared in China. When
I asked one of the new Western-suited young technocrats how
this accorded with socialist ideas, he blandly told me: `Ah,
this is the new socialism'.

     Senator Archer - Not in Australia.

     Senator MASON - If that is the case, maybe we could do
with some of it here, Senator Archer. I commend to Senator
Archer and others, Senator Siddons's ideas on industrial
democracy. They passed the Senate once. Can we not go back to
that workable system of industrial democracy where the work
force would be largely self-regulating and we would need the
doctrinaire unions less. I repeat that the Government could
do worse than look at the Chinese system of worker incentives
in that light.

     Senator CROWLEY (South Australia) (5.21) - Much can be
said on the annual report of the Department of Foreign Affairs.
l will resist wandering through many areas, some of which are
fairly unknown to me. I draw attention in particular to two
parts of the report that I found very interesting. One is the
reference in the report to the Department's equal employment
opportunity program and the women's budget program. I do so
because foreign affairs seems to be an area of little concern
for women. If women are at all concerned, they tend to have
nice soft feelings about such things as peace and foreign
affairs. That is not a real description of the situation. It
is worth noting that the Department is addressing quite
different understandings of the importance of foreign affairs
to women. I draw the Senate's attention to the difficulties I
had in reading the section on page 59 about how the Equal
Employment Opportunity Unit is constituted. One would need to
be a master of the alphabet to understand it, if not a
mistress. It states:

     The Committee consists of FAS (MFSD) (Chairman); AS
Staffing and Organisation Branch (SOB); AS Operations Support
(OS); ADAB or Head of Operations Support, Director, Personnel
Development, Director, Staffing and representatives of unions
and staff associations which have members working in the
Department.

I appreciate the seriousness with which the Equal Employment
Opportunity Consultative Committee is taken and the
seriousness and significance of the people appointed. I simply
ask that the people writing the report in future spell out what
some of those letters mean. It is a matter of some puzzlement
to interpret them. They go to the seriousness with which the
Department addresses equal employment opportunities. The Equal
Employment Opportunity Unit addresses not only the needs of
women, but the needs of all people in our society who are
disadvantaged or not yet receiving equal opportunities within
the Australian Public Service and, in particular, within the
Department.

     Despite some efforts to address the situation, initial
statistical work reveals a similar picture in this Department
to that in the Australian Public Service as a whole. Women were
underrepresented in senior and non-traditional designations
and significantly underrepresented in foreign affairs officer,
consular and administrative streams. There were few
Aboriginals and people with disabilities had little opportunity
for career development or promotion. The Equal Employment
Opportunity Unit is looking seriously at ways that those
categories of underrepresentation can be addressed within the
Department. There are some challenges, particularly
considering disabled people or women, in that some of the
overseas appointments do not automatically follow for those
people.  But the Department is serious in addressing both considerations.


</sample>
