<sample>
	<id> H23  </id>
	


	<note> 2031 words </note>
	


	<source> Death of Mr Olof Palme. House of Representatives. 11 March, 1986 </source>
	

Madam SPEAKER (Hon. Joan Child) took the chair at 2 p.m., and
read prayers.


	<h> PRIVILEGE </h>
	

  Mr SINCLAIR (New England - Leader of the National Party of
Australia) - Madam Speaker, I wish to raise a matter of
privilege, but I understand that it would suit your convenience
if the matter were deferred until the item dealing with
Commonwealth Day is behind us.

Madam SPEAKER - Yes, I think that would suit the House.


	<h> DEATH OF MR OLOF PALME </h>
	

  Mr HAWKE (Wills - Prime Minister) - I move:
  That this House express its profound sadness at the death on
1 March 1986 of Mr Olof Palme, Prime Minister of Sweden, its
condemnation of the brutal act which took his life, and its
condolences to Mr Palme's family and to the Government and
people of Sweden.

I am sure that all members of the House were shocked and
saddened to hear of Olof Palme's murder. Such a criminal act
should receive the strongest condemnation. Prime Minister
Palme's tragic and untimely death was a great loss to Sweden
and the world. He had served his country in various portfolios
since 1963 and was Prime Minister of his country for 11 years.
In the Swedish context, notable for its tradition of peace and
non-violence, the senseless futility of this act stands out the
more starkly.

  Sweden has lost an outstanding leader - a man with a deep
personal political philosophy and strong social democratic
ideals. As Prime Minister, Olof Palme worked vigorously towards
maintaining a strong economy, achieving full employment and
safeguarding the welfare of all. But it was a notable feature
of his leadership that his concern for economic and social
justice did not end with the affairs of his own country. He
brought the same passionate commitment to these ideals to bear
on his approach to world affairs and did so, moreover, with a
real depth of intellect. Olof Palme was a man devoted to
promoting economic development, social justice and peace and
he understood the inter-relationship of these objectives.

  Mr Palme's global commitment to the democratic process and to
the rights, freedoms and wellbeing of all people is attested
by the policies he adopted. His stand for fundamental human
rights can be seen in his championing of the campaign against
racism. He promoted a generous refugee policy, believing it to
be an important expression of international humanitarian
solidarity. He believed that rich nations should join in the
struggle against poverty to achieve a more just world order.

  Olof Palme was Vice-President of the Socialist International
and led its working group on the southern Africa question. He
was a member of the important Brandt Commission which studied
questions concerning the relationship between rich and poor
nations. In November 1980 Mr Palme was appointed as
representative of the United Nations Secretary-General to seek
a peaceful resolution of the Iran/Iraq conflict. He stood firm
on Sweden's policy of neutrality and worked tirelessly to
promote world peace and disarmament. Olof Palme's contribution
to the international debate on arms control and disarmament won
him wide acclaim during his chairmanship of the Commission on
Disarmament and Security from 1980 to 1982. The Commission's
report bears the Palme imprint in the importance it attaches
to the objective of joint survival rather than the threat of
mutual destruction as the basis for a true and lasting peace.

  Olof Palme was an idealist without illusions. He recognised
that general and complete disarmament was a long term objective
which could be achieved only through patient and careful
negotiations that took account of international security
concerns, and those of the United States and the Soviet Union
in particular. Palme did not consider nuclear deterrence to be
an acceptable permanent basis for international peace and
stability, but he accepted that it is the only viable option
as an interim security measure while arms control negotiations
take place. The Australian Government's approach to arms control 
and disarmament shares many of the perspectives of the
Palme report on these issues.

  Olof Palme also played a significant role in the setting up 
in 1984 of the Conference on Disarmament in Europe, which 
aims to build confidence and reduce the risk of conflict 
between states in Europe. Olof Palme firmly believed, as 
the Australian Government does, that questions of peace and
disarmament in the nuclear age should be the concern of all
nations and should not be left for the nuclear weapon states
and the big powers alone to determine. His passing is a great
loss to all of us throughout the world, regardless of
ideological divisions between those in the East and those in
the West and regardless of economic divisions between the
people of the North and those of the South. It is for his
contribution to the noble goal of transcending such divisions
which exist in this imperfect world that Olof Palme will be
remembered most widely.

  Senator Don Grimes, the Deputy Leader of the Government in the
Senate and Minister for Community Services, will represent the
Government at Olof Palme's funeral, which is to be held in
Stockholm on 15 March. Senator Grimes was a personal friend of
the late Prime Minister, having met him on a number of
occasions at meetings of the Socialist International, and is
also a friend of Mr Palme's widow, Lisbeth. The attendance of
Senator Grimes at the funeral is a mark of the deep respect
which the Australian Government has for Olof Palme's
achievements in the cause of world peace and social justice,
and of the friendship which Australia feels for the Government
and people of Sweden. It would be fitting, Madam Speaker, if
the terms of the resolution could be passed on to Mr Palme's
family and to the Government of Sweden.

  Mr HOWARD (Bennelong - Leader of the Opposition) - The Opposition
supports the motion of condolence moved by the Prime Minister
(Mr Hawke). It is always with a particular degree of horror
that the world reacts to political assassination. The
circumstances of Mr Palme's untimely death draw properly from
the Prime Minister and the House universal condemnation of such
mindless and unjustified acts of terrorism and are a reminder
to all of us of the relatively precarious nature of the lives
of those who wish to live out the democratic ideal.

  Whatever one's views may be about Olof Palme's political views
within the broad Western democratic spectrum, he was a
dedicated supporter of the ideal of peace amongst nations. He
served his country as Prime Minister for 11 years. He was
respected in international political forums, and properly so.
He worked very hard for the cause of world peace and lived
out, in his political and personal life, the ideals in which
he believed. I very warmly associate the Opposition with the
words of condolence in relation to his death and the words of
condemnation properly delivered by the Prime Minister regarding 
the circumstances of his very tragic and untimely assassination.

  Mr SINCLAIR (New England - Leader of the National Party of
Australia) - On behalf of the members of the National Party of
Australia, I too would like to endorse the motion of condolence 
submitted to this House by the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke)
on the death of Mr Olof Palme, the Prime Minister of Sweden.
Much has been written and said of Olof Palme in Australia,
Europe, and elsewhere. He was a Swedish leader who was known as
much outside Sweden as he was within it. He was a man whose
name and reputation for the cause of peace won acclaim from all
sides of politics and many of the precepts and statements he
issued, both on his own and officially, have become well known
in the general tracts of the international community. Indeed,
the volume that he produced on peace and disarmament security
which he submitted to the United Nations was one of the
bulwarks within which it is still hoped that negotiation will
continue towards disarmament around the world.
  There are aspects of his life that I think many of us would do
well to emulate. He certainly is one who, having been born as
an aristocrat, devoted much of his life towards the cause of
others. He was a man who worked for peace throughout his life,
yet sadly died by a gun. It is a tragedy that one who had so
much to contribute and who through his life did so much for
others should have died this way. On behalf of all the members
of my Party we submit our condolences not only to the nation
and the people of Sweden but also to his wife and family.

  Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor - Minister for Science) - Olof Palme was
the inheritor of a remarkable, even unique political tradition.
He was only the fourth leader in the history of the Swedish
Social Democratic Party, and all four leaders from 1896 held
the office of Prime Minister - Haljmer Branting, Per Albin
Hansson, Tage Erlander and Olof Palme. Sweden is also
noteworthy for its absence of political violence. As was
frequently noted in the last few days, Palme's was the first
political assassination in Sweden since the murder of King
Gustav III in 1792, nearly 200 years ago. The traditions of
tolerance, liberalism and compassion have been built into the
Swedish social fabric. Palme was a tireless crusader for world
peace and human rights. Although his outspoken views made enemies 
of some great powers at various times, both the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
were united in expressing their outrage at his savage and
inexplicable murder. All Australians unite in our abhorrence
of political assassination of rule by the gun. His death
follows that of his mentor, Alva Myrdal, a Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate, just a few months ago. Like her, his work deserves
international recognition. It would be entirely appropriate for
him to receive posthumously the Nobel Peace Prize for 1986. Not
all such awards have been equally well deserved. In Olof
Palme's case it would be.

  Dr THEOPHANOUS (Calwell) - I rise to say a few words in relation
to the work of Olof Palme in the development of democratic
socialist tradition and democratic socialist theory. Olof Palme
believed that it was possible to develop a political system and
a political tradition which on the one hand was opposed to the
general conservative tradition and on the other hand was not
in line with the Marxist-Leninist tradition of the Soviet
countries. Palme's work in relation to the development of
democratic socialist thought and tradition has had an enormous
impact on the Socialist International, of which the Australian
Labor Party is a member party. He was behind much of the
inspiration for the Socialist International's resurgence in
recent times and for the getting together of social democratic
parties in order to help not only to achieve peace, as people
have mentioned before, but also to deal with some of the
fundamental problems concerning the issue of the Third World-
First World relations and the poverty of the Third World. As
the Minister for Science (Mr Barry Jones) has said, Olof Palme
was an outstanding man in our time. His contribution has been
enormous and his death is a very great and sad loss.

  Mr TICKNER (Hughes) - I had not intended to make any remarks on
this occasion, but I am moved by what I believe to be the great
importance of it to briefly make my personal tribute to Mr Olof
Palme. I did not meet the former Prime Minister, unlike our
Minister for Community Services (Senator Grimes). However, I
heard him speak on one occasion when I attended a conference
of the international union of local authorities in Stockholm.
His contribution to that conference will live with me for the
rest of my life. I believe that his world leadership in
attempting to promote international peace could not be borne
out in any more substantial way than by the fact that upon his
death, President Reagan praised his `untiring efforts to promote
peace', while in Moscow the delegates to The Communist Party
Congress rose for a minute's silence in tribute. 


</sample>
