<sample>
	<id> H25 </id>
	


	<note> 2001 words </note>
	


	<source> Migration program 1986-87. House of Representatives. 10 April 1986 </source>
	

Madam SPEAKER (Hon. Joan Child) took the chair at 10 a.m., and
read prayers.


	<h> MIGRATION PROGRAM 1986-87 </h>
	

	<h> Ministerial Statement </h>
	
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide - Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs) - by leave - The purpose of this statement is to
announce the Government's migration program for 1986-87. In
doing so, I would first like to draw the attention of honourable
members to the demographic and economic issues relevant to
Australia's population and immigration policies in the longer
term. While current economic and social circumstances are
important in setting immigration programs, the Government is
conscious of the importance of the questions of the longer term
benefits and costs which must be addressed if Australia is to
exploit its full potential.

  Immigration intakes of recent years have combined with
decreasing natural increase to produce population growth rates
well below historical experience. Since 1946 the average annual 
population growth rate has been 1.85 per cent; as recently
as 1983-84 it fell to as low as 1.15 per cent. About half of
post-World War II population growth has been due to natural 
increase and the other half directly the result of migration.
However, immigration has had a significant indirect stimulus
through natural increase.

  Although Australia's population is still slowly increasing by
virtue of natural increase alone, this will persist only while
the age structure of our population remains relatively young.
The level of Australian fertility is currently 10 per cent
below the long term population replacement level and there is
little chance of a recovery. Although Australia's level of
mortality is low, still declining, and satisfactory by global
comparisons, the crude death rate will rise as the population
progressively ages. With a continuation of these trends in
births and deaths, Australia's population would begin to
decline half way through the next century, in the absence of
immigration.

  While still relatively young, the Australian population is also
ageing progressively. Honourable members will be aware that this 
development has significant welfare, taxation, labour market and 
economic consequences. Short of substantial increases in recent 
levels of immigration, the ageing of the population will 
accelerate sharply early in the next century. If current levels 
of immigration are retained, the aged dependency ratio would
increase by 58 per cent by the year 2021. This ratio broadly
relates those in retirement age to those available to the
labour market. A 58 per cent increase in this ratio would have
dramatic and far-reaching social and economic consequences. No
society and no government can responsibly ignore these trends.

  Immigration cannot reverse ageing of the population but it can
retard the process. Over the last decade or so, the average age
of new settlers has been some five years younger than the average 
age of the resident population. To retard the ageing
process significantly will require a sustained return to more
traditional, historical levels of immigration programs.

  Population is not merely a question of numbers, growth rates
or age profiles. The distributional impact of migration, both
international and internal, cannot be ignored. The Government
is conscious of the propensity of migrants to settle in
existing urban communities, but it does not regard this as an
issue which can be properly addressed in a migration context
alone, given that people in Australia are free to choose the
place in which they will live and work. Recent research
demonstrates that migrants are at least as mobile and flexible
as their Australian-born counterparts, particularly in the
early years of settlement. Equally, proper concerns about
environmental issues are relevant to population growth and
immigration programs. Ultimately, however, the capacity of a
nation to address environmental concerns largely resides in
areas other than immigration, including capacity to generate
economic wealth, a sufficient tax base and technological
sophistication.

  Immigration levels cannot be determined in isolation from
permanent and long term departures. In recent years permanent
departures have fluctuated from a low of 19,500 in 1980-81 to
a high of 25,000 in 1982-83. They have resulted in substantial
losses of skilled workers. Accordingly, the contribution of net
permanent migration to the Australian labour market has been
substantially less than the contribution of permanent settlers
alone.

  I turn now to the economic implications of immigration. Recent
research undertaken by the Committee for the Economic Development 
of Australia, CEDA, and my Department is relevant to our 
understanding of the role of immigration in the Australian 
economy. It is generally accepted that research of this kind 
is complex and based in part on econometric models, and
that the findings have to be seen in that light. However, the
more significant research findings are sufficiently important
to include in this statement. Until recently, many
Australians, and not least Australian opinion leaders, have
subscribed to the populist view that during periods of high
unemployment or economic downturn immigration is
disadvantageous to the employment prospects of Australians
seeking to enter the labour market. These mistaken perceptions
need serious attention. I draw the attention of honourable
members to three of the CEDA research findings. The first is
that immigration has contributed positively to economic growth
and development. The second is that immigration, even in the
very short term, does not adversely affect the employment
prospects of the Australian resident population, with few
localised and particular exceptions. The third is that the
skill, education, age and self-sufficiency profiles of a
particular intake are perhaps more important than the overall
scale of any one intake.

  In relation to this question of education and skills, the
Government has noted the call for higher levels of skilled
labour and business migration. The Economic Planning Advisory
Council, EPAC, suggested that the skill composition and base
of the Australian labour force could be enhanced in the medium
term from increases in these programs. Whilst agreeing with
these views, the Government is equally committed to upgrading
the skill base of the Australian community by appropriate
education, training and retraining policies and programs.

  In the long term, population policy objectives and economic
rationality will be best served by a progressive return to more
traditional levels of immigration. This return must be gradual,
in part because the lead times in immigration are significant.
Australia faces as much international competition for people
with positive economic attributes as it does for commodity and
capital markets. If anything, the level of competition is
likely to sharpen in the medium to longer term. The Government
sees properly managed population growth and immigration as an
important strategy for economic policy options. All economic
policy instruments involve short and long term benefits and
costs, and immigration is no exception .

  In looking at the long term future the Government is concerned
to awaken Australia's interest in, and appreciation of, the
population dimension. The appendices to this statement, which
I shall table at the end of my speech, underpin the statement
and provide a basis for an informed understanding of where we 
are and where we are headed. I recently asked the National 
Population Council to develop and advise me on long term 
population options for Australia. I expect that the Council's 
advice and the statement I have made will both serve to elicit 
public comment on these longer term population and immigration 
issues.

  It should be noted that, if it were decided that Australia's
population by the year 2000 should be about 19 million, then
that outcome would be achieved by an average annual immigration
program of 120,000. If it were decided that there should be a
population target of some 30 million by the year 2038, the
250th year of European settlement of this continent, then such
an outcome would be reached with an average annual migrant
intake of 160,000. Both outcomes would be more likely were
fertility rates to recover to higher levels. In either event,
both could be achieved by manageable progressive increases in
recent levels of immigration to intakes comparable to those
experienced in the 1940s and 1960s when the population base and
Australia's absorption capacity were substantially less then
they are now or will be in the future.

  Australia's aim should be to see its immigration program in
the context both of humane and community concerns and of
population and economic development needs. Our understanding
must be that immigrants, carefully selected, create more jobs
than they take. It is against this philosophical and factual
background that the Government has considered the migration
program for 1986-87 and indicative planning levels for the
subsequent two years. In developing the program the Government
has had the benefit of formal advice from employers, trade
unions, community groups, State governments, local government
representatives, academics and the National Population Council.
We propose a program of 95,000 visa issues and change of
status approvals in 1986-87. This compares with an expected
outcome of 89,000 in the current year and a planning level of
84,000. It represents a modest initial increase, and one I
expect will be achieved.

  For the two subsequent years the Government has set indicative
planning levels of 110,000 and 125,000, respectively. These
levels are no more than indicative for planning purposes. They
could represent the beginnings of a possible gradual increase
in immigration which may thereby, subject to community support
following from consultation on resources and needs, return by
managed steps to historical intake levels of 160,000 to 170,000 
or about I per cent of population at that time. These are 
decisions for the future - but the foundations are being laid.

  I announce one major change and initiative to the structure of
the migration program of interest to all honourable members.
The Government has decided to develop the concept of an
independent and concessional migration category to attract a
wider and more numerous number of people with the potential to
contribute to Australia's economic and social needs. This
category is based on the principles of the current extended
family (category C) program, which as honourable members would
know, covers sponsored adult siblings and non-dependant
children. Applicants will be required to achieve a pass mark
of 70 points on the existing points system which relates to the
age, employability, education and skill characteristics of the
potential migrant. In recognition of the economic support that
family in Australia can provide, concessionary points will be
given to adult brothers and sisters and non-dependent children
(10 points out of 70) and nephews and nieces (5 points).

  In summary, the new independent and concessionary migration
category brings benefits from the economic gains to Australia
from the people likely to succeed in their migration
applications, whilst recognising at the same time the economic
and social advantages of the extended family nexus. This
category is not one of entitlements but one of optimising human
and economic realities. Effectively, the Government is
concerned here with attracting people Australia needs,
motivationally, economically and in terms of population
building and the retardation of aging. Would-be independent
migrants with no family ties but who adequately meet the
criteria of employability, self-sufficiency, youth, skills and/
or education will still be eligible to be included in our
expanding migration program.

  At the same time, I emphasise the Government maintains its
commitment to reunion of immediate family. The family unit for
us is the Australian family unit based on husband, wife,
dependent children and retired parents. For aged parents of
independent means, spouses and dependent children, entry is
virtually automatic. On present levels of demand, I estimate
a program of 26,000 visas in 1986-87 compared with an
estimated outcome of 25,000 in 1985-86. A sensitive element has
been the Vietnam family migration program, which relies on the
continued co-operation of the Vietnamese Government. It needs
to be understood that in return for their responsibility to 
integrate into and contribute to Australian society, one of the
rights given to migrants is to be reunited with immediate family.
But this right does not flow over to the extended family. Extended
family members are given preference for migration, more so in
Australia than in the United States or Canada, but they must qualify
for migration on the basis of the potential contribution they can
make to Australian society.


</sample>
