<sample>
	<id> H26 </id>
	


	<note> 2015 words </note>
	


	<source> Macquarie university: study at Macquarie 1987. A guide to 
undergraduate programs. </source>
	


	<h> GENERAL INFORMATION </h>
	


	<h> Establishment </h>
	

Macquarie University was established by an Act of the New South
Wales State Parliament in June 1964. The University accepted a
small number of postgraduate students in 1966 and began the
teaching of undergraduates in 1967. It was the third university to
be established in the metropolitan area of Sydney.


	<h> Location </h>
	

The University is located on a 135-hectare site at North Ryde in
the north-western suburbs of Sydney, approximately eighteen
kilometres from the centre of the city. (See map on inside back cover.)


	<h> Campus Plan </h>
	

The central part of the campus is occupied by eighteen buildings
for teaching and research, together with the University Library,
the University Union building (with an associated commercial
centre), the Council Building (which houses administrative
offices), and the Macquarie Theatre. The surrounding and outlying
areas are used for purposes such as University student housing,
affiliated residential colleges, parking, sporting facilities, a
biological resources area and open parkland.

Every effort has been made by the planners to retain the
original rural nature of the site. Gum trees, native shrubs and
lawns have been planted around the buildings, and there are
extensive areas of natural bushland around the perimeters of the
campus


	<h> Enrolment </h>
	

Macquarie University now has more than 20,000 graduates. Its 1986 
enrolment stands at over 11,500. In terms of total student numbers 
Macquarie is now the sixth largest of Australia's nineteen universities.


	<h> Academic Structure </h>
	

Macquarie is unique among New South Wales universities in its
academic structure. In order to allow students as much freedom 
as possible in their choice of studies, the University has moved 
away from the familiar organisation into faculties and is organised 
instead as a single integrated body consisting of eleven Schools 
and two Interdisciplinary Centres:

   The Schools of Behavioural Sciences, Biological Sciences,     
   Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Economic and Financial Studies,      
   Education, English and Linguistics, History, Philosophy and      
   Politics, Law, Mathematics and Physics, Modern Languages;      
   and the Centre for Environmental and Urban Studies and the      
   Graduate School of Management.

The range of studies within these Schools covers the traditional
faculties of Arts, Economics (or Commerce), Education, Law and
Science. The fields of study and the degree programs are listed in
the table on page 8.

On enrolment students register in one School and follow a
program approved by the Head of that School, but are able to add
to their main areas of study courses in other fields which may
be in other Schools.


	<h> Courses and Credit Points </h>
	

An essential feature of the Macquarie system is the provision of
courses of differing length and workload, rather than fixed year-
long subject units. (Most Macquarie courses are of half-year
length.) Each course carries a credit-point value related to its
workload, and progress to graduation is measured in terms of
accumulated credit points.

Class attendance is often only a small proportion of the total
workload for a course: tutorials, laboratory, reading and research
in the library, writing assignments and study at home are all part
of the work involved. It is expected that one credit point in a
half-year course involves, on the average, four hours of work each
week in that half-year. Full-time students will normally take
courses totalling about 24 credit points in a year; part-time
students about 12 credit points.


	<h> Academic Advising </h>
	

Each student is assigned an academic adviser drawn from the
teaching staff of the School in which the student is enrolled, and
is encouraged to discuss with this adviser any study problems that
may arise. The academic adviser is normally the first point of
contact for the student with a problem.


	<h> Teaching Methods </h>
	

In its teaching methods Macquarie University aims to provide as
much contact as possible between academic staff and students. Where
possible the tutorial rather than the general lecture is the basis
of teaching. Practical science work is carried out in small
laboratory units where groups of students work under a supervisor.


	<h> External Programs </h>
	

The University offers external programs leading to the awards of
BA, BSc and BLegS. The range of courses available by external study
is limited. External teaching involves the use of study guides and
reading programs, audio tapes and the regular submission of written
assignments. Most external courses require attendance at short
intensive on-campus sessions normally held at the University.


	<h> Advantages of the Macquarie System </h>
	

The advantages offered by the Macquarie system are:

 choice of emphasis in main area(s) of study;

‚2 width and freedom of choice of secondary areas of study;

‚2 opportunity for interdisciplinary programs combining two or more
  related fields;

‚2 flexibility to change direction and still retain credit for
  courses already completed;

‚2 ability to take a relevant segment of study in another field
  without having to enrol in a comprehensive full-year course;

‚2 opportunity (if desired) for intense specialisation at second-
  year and third-year levels.


	<h> Postgraduate Study </h>
	

Students who have completed their undergraduate studies and
qualified for a degree may proceed to graduate diploma programs
which are offered in ancient documentary studies, audiology,
business administration, children's literature, computing,
development education, environmental studies, geoscience and urban
studies.

Higher degree programs (for Master's or PhD degrees) are offered in 
all Schools, and special vocational Master's programs are offered in 
the fields of accounting and financial management, applied finance, 
audiology, business administration, clinical psychology,
computing, counselling, economics, education, environmental
planning, environmental studies, geoscience, linguistics, mass
communication, migration studies, professional accounting, 
public management, school counselling, special education, and 
urban studies.


	<h> Non-degree Enrolment </h>
	

Persons who are not candidates for a degree may be permitted to
attend an undergraduate course provided that accommodation and
facilities are available and that the Head of the School in which
the course is provided considers that the person has an adequate
background to study the course. Applicants must be qualified for
matriculation status and be eligible for admission as bachelor
degree candidates. The number of places available for non-degree 
enrolment is limited and it may not be possible to accept all 
qualified applicants. Applications close with the Registrar, 
Macquarie University, on 1 October 1986.


	<h> Continuing Education </h>
	

Macquarie University's Continuing Education Program consists of
a range of short, self-contained courses outside the University's
normal undergraduate and postgraduate teaching programs. The program 
is in accord with the concept of a lifelong education and with the
University's aim of maintaining a close relationship with the wider
community.

Courses in the program are of two kinds: professional
development or refresher courses intended to broaden or update the
knowledge of people working in a profession; and general interest
courses enabling people to pursue a personal interest in a subject
outside their normal vocation.

The courses vary considerably in length and time of offering to
suit different categories of participants Some are short,
intensive full-time courses; others are designed for part-time
students and involve a few hours' attendance each week throughout
an academic half-year, or full year.


	<h> Fields of Undergraduate Study </h>
	

The table on p.8 summarises the fields of study in which students
enrolled in a degree program may major. The letters D, E and X in
the column following each field of study indicate that this
program is offered as a major study by day, evening and external
courses, respectively. In addition, individual courses in certain
other fields are offered in the evening or by external study, or
in mixed mode, that is partly by attendance on campus and partly
by external study.

Only students who have been admitted to a Bachelor of Economics or 
a related program (BEc, BEc DipEd or BEc LLB) will be guaranteed a 
place in first-year courses in accounting. A quota of places in 
first-year accounting will be available for students who are not 
enrolled in a BEc or related program. Only students who have been 
admitted to a law program (BA LLB, BEc LLB, BSc LLB or BLegS) are 
permitted to undertake courses in law in their first year of 
enrolment. A small quota of places in first-year law courses is 
available to later-year students who are not enrolled in a law program.
Student entry to Computing Science I, which would lead to a major in 
Computing Science and Information Systems, may be restricted by quota.


	<h> Bachelor of Arts </h>
	

The degree of Bachelor of Arts requires a minimum of three years
of full-time study (longer for part-time students). All fields of
study shown above are available for the BA. However, students in the
BA program who wish to include courses in accounting in their
program of studies must apply for one of the limited places for
students not enrolled in the BEc or a related program. Similarly,
students not enrolled in a law program who wish to include one or
more law courses in their program of studies must apply for one of
the limited places available. Such places are allocated on the
basis of academic merit.

The flexible structure of the BA program allows students to
develop programs made up of courses selected from the wide range
of fields of study available whether in the usual arts areas or
in science, social science or economics and finance. It is possible 
to undertake a major study in any of the fields listed. Thus
students can construct a program of study appropriate to their
interests and vocational aims.

To qualify for the BA degree a student must complete at least
68 credit points of which 38 must be gained in other than 100-level
(that is first-year) courses and at least 18 must be gained in other
than 100- or 200-level. A substantial and coherent area of study above
200-level must be completed.


	<h> Bachelor of Economics </h>
	

The degree of Bachelor of Economics requires a minimum of three
years' full-time study (longer for part-time students). Fields of
study available in the School of Economic and Financial Studies for
the BEc degree are: economics, accounting and financial
management, actuarial studies and demography.

The emphasis in modern economics and business studies is
increasingly quantitative, and the courses offered by the School
reflect this emphasis. The BEc provides a basic qualification for
a variety of careers in the business and financial spheres, for
teachers, and for careers in the Public Service.

To qualify for the BEc degree students must complete at least
68 credit points, of which at least 38 must be above 100 level
(that is first-year) and at least 18 must be above 200 level
in courses designated for the BEc degree.


	<h> Bachelor of Science </h>
	

The degree of Bachelor of Science requires three years of full-time
study (longer for part-time students). It is also available by
external study. The four science Schools are Biological Sciences,
Chemistry, Earth Sciences and Mathematics and Physics.

To qualify for the BSc degree students must complete about three-
quarters of the total of 68 credit points required in science
courses. Science courses are offered by the four science schools
and by the Centre for Environmental and Urban Studies. As well
there are courses in statistics, psychology, actuarial studies and
other fields which are designated as Science courses. The remaining
credit points required can be made up of other science courses or
humanities or social science courses.

The Macquarie School structure enables students to follow
expanding modern fields, such as chemical physics or geochemistry,
whilst gaining an appropriate knowledge of `classical' science.
Students who complete major studies in a particular subject, for 
example chemistry, may qualify for admission to the appropriate
professional institute.

Courses in Biological Sciences and Chemistry are not offered in the
evening and there is only a limited range of courses in Earth
Sciences and Mathematics and Physics available by evening study.
Consequently, students planning to undertake study in these
disciplines by part-time enrolment may need to consider enrolling
in the external science program or including some external courses
in their program. 


	<h> Bachelor of Arts/Bachelor of Economics/Bachelor of Science with the
Diploma of Education </h>
	

Studies for the degree of Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Economics 
or Bachelor of Science with the Diploma of Education are taken 
concurrently, normally over four years of full-time study or its 
part-time equivalent. Although the program may be undertaken on a part-time basis, many of the courses are offered only during the day.


</sample>
