by Professor David Caro, Vice-Chancellor  

  To write about a single year is to capture merely a fragment
of University life - a host of dependent, but often unrelated
events. Of course, 1985 is no exception.
  Several events dominate - our research successes, the demand for
student places, the transfer of the RAAF Academy, and our
continuing efforts to meet new and pressing obligations
stemming from recent legislation on social issues.
  Overall the University can look back on its achievements during
1985 with satisfaction, even pride.
  The demand for University of Melbourne courses remained high.
Of the 15,000 applicants for places, we were able to take
3,500. The year also saw the introduction of the University's
special admissions scheme - for students who would not normally
gain entry under the existing selection procedures. One hundred
and forty students were admitted under the scheme, 82 from
Victorian high schools, 19 from Catholic schools, two from non-
Catholic independent schools, four from technical schools and
15 from technical and further education colleges.
  The special admissions scheme has been introduced on a three-
year trial basis to allow the University to evaluate selection
procedures. In selecting students, the University considered 
qualitative information such as school principals' recommendations,
internal school assessments and work experience.

 Anti-intellectual environment  
In a recent address the Minister for Science, Mr Barry Jones,
said "Australia is one of the few countries in the Western
World in which the words `academic' and `intellectual' are used
as terms of abuse." He is right, and I often wonder how long
we can afford that.
  Despite this anti-intellectual environment, the University of
Melbourne added to its international standing as a research
institution during 1985.
  The University signed a $140,000 contract to supply a proton-
microprobe to the Institute of Physics in Beijing, one of
China's leading research institutes. The microprobe, developed
in the University's School of Physics, is the most advanced
instrument of its type in the world.
  The `bionic ear', or cochlear implant, developed by Professor
Graeme Clark's research team at the Royal Victorian Eye and Ear
Hospital, and the bio-medical firm, Nucleus Limited, has
spawned sister companies to develop, market and sell the device
internationally.
  The University also established a microanalytical research
centre in the School of Physics, and with other institutions,
developed a key centre for statistics. The statistics centre,
one of seven centres of teaching and research funded by the
Commonwealth Government, was established with Monash and La
Trobe Universities and the Royal Melbourne Institute of
Technology.
  To help expand Australia's commercial activities in China and
Japan, the Faculty of Law launched an Asian Law Centre.
Initially the Centre will concentrate on Chinese and Japanese
Law, particularly in the area of trade and commerce. It will
initiate preliminary research on legal developments in Korea
and Hong Kong.
  An era came to an end on 31 December when the RAAF Academy
transferred from the University to the new Defence Forces
Academy in Canberra. The Academy's 24-year association with the
University has been a proud one - both in teaching and research.
It has graduated 35 students in physics each year during the
past few years.
  About 550 students of the RAAF Academy have been awarded the
Degree of Bachelor of Science including 50 with honours. Fifty
students have completed the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy and
30 the Master of Science. Approximately 500 publications have
resulted from research activities.
  During 1985 the University appointed an equal opportunity
officer, and approved policies on equal opportunity and on
combating sexual harassment. As well, the University made plans
to expand its childcare facilities. An additional centre
accommodating 60 children will be opened in Bouverie Street.
  Last year I reported the establishment of an Alumni Association
aimed at strengthening and working with existing graduate
organizations. Throughout the year alumni meetings were held
in Brisbane, Sydney, Perth and Canberra, and interest in the
University and its activities increased significantly. More
than 200 people attended the launching of the University of
Melbourne Gallery Society in June. The Society provides a means
for members to develop and extend their interest in the visual
arts through an active program of events.
  During the year the University was saddened by the deaths of
former Vice-Chancellors Sir David Derham and Sir George Paton;
Professor Emeritus Wilfred Prest, of Economics; Professor
Emeritus Victor Trikojus, of Biochemistry; and Deputy
Chancellor Dr Geoffrey Downes. All served the University with
distinction and will be greatly missed.

 Pressures on education  
The year's events have to be seen within the context of the
pressures on the whole education system. Universities have to
function in an environment beyond their own control - an
environment created by Commonwealth and State Governments.
  Whether we like it or not, universities are part of the
political scene. At times the education system suffers from
political compromises and from interaction between governments
- often without apparent rhyme or reason. It is a political
environment which can hamper intellectual pursuit in many ways.
  In so many aspects of University life we are hamstrung by
government regulation. The number of students, the way we seek
funds, and the type and, at times, quality of courses are
circumscribed by governments.
  On student numbers, for example, the University must follow
Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission edicts.
  The University would like to accept many more students, but
funding is not available at this stage. There is much talk of
increased participation and equality of opportunity but not
much is actually being done about it. When the Commonwealth
Government abolished tertiary fees, the change for universities
was profound. Since then there has been a single source of
income, not three sources as previously. To some extent this
hinders state and community objectives.
  When the change in funding took place, the Commonwealth
expenditure on education rose from four per cent of the budget
to 9.4 per cent in one year. Ever since, education has been
under attack by Treasury and the Department of Finance.
  Beset by more and more government regulation, by both the State
and the Commonwealth, the problem for Australian universities
in the past decade has been to survive and find ways to support
their proper functions despite the government strait-jacket.
  At present the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission is
undergoing a further change and it seems certain to increase
its intervention in university affairs. At the same time, the
Victorian universities are influenced by the Victorian Post-
Secondary Education Commission. While the Chairman of that 
body is most helpful to the universities, the Commission's 
Act would allow it to have a major impact on universities 
and it could, at any time, be in conflict with the Commonwealth.

 Giving education priority  
Of course, there are many problems - student numbers, funding
of places, re-introduction of fees, research funding, course
structure, institutional autonomy, the need to help
disadvantaged groups . . . But our most serious problem may be
in the way politicians and bureaucrats think about education.
Too often it is seen only as an expense without an immediate
economic return. It is an attitude which leads to debates about
preparing people for set tasks, cost-effectiveness, and
frustration as attempts to measure human potential defy
bureaucratic formulae.
  Now that the Commonwealth is funding higher education and, in
part, schools as well, the Federal education budget is around
$4,000 million a year. Unless this can be reduced significantly, 
education will be attacked in each budget. We need, therefore, 
to consider how higher education might be funded by means other 
than, or as well as by Commonwealth grants. However, the 
re-introduction of fees is just one issue.
  The time has come to give education priority in our national
thinking. One hesitates to advocate an education summit
meeting, but politicians and educators must begin to set common
goals for education. At the same time they must agree on the
best methods to achieve them.
  For our University there are some concerns but I am convinced
that with goodwill and good management the University of
Melbourne will continue to serve its communities - both locally
and internationally - with distinction.
  One of the greatest comforts for a Vice-Chancellor is the
knowledge that he can rely for support on the skills and
influence of a large and increasingly active body of graduates.

