Photoionisation and auger electron emission from the lithium molecule:
calculations using multicentre numerical continuum functions   By F.P. Larkins and J.A. Richards Abstract  

A numerical method has been used for the generation of molecular
continuum wavefunctions at the relaxed Hartree-Fock level associated with
the photoionisation of the lithium molecule.  Exchange between the continuum
electron and the ion core is included, but L coupling is neglected.
Cross sections for core and valence shell photoionisation have been calculated
from threshold to 6.0 a.u.  The results differ significantly in detail from
previous multiple scattering calculations.  Continuum phase shifts and the
asymmetry parameters for the various processes are also reported.  The
molecular cross section values are compared with atomic cross sections
calculated at the relaxed Hartree-Fock level.  The Li2 molecular Auger
transition rates are also calculated from first principles using the
appropriate two-centre continuum functions.  The results provide a basis
for the reinterpretation of recent experimental findings of photoemission
data for the lithium vapour system.

 1. Introduction  

  A major challenge in the calculation of molecular photoionisation cross
sections and the associated angular distribution parameters is to describe
adequately the final continuum state involving the ejected photoelectron.
A range of methods has been proposed to address this problem.  Many are
approximate in nature and do not require the explicit evaluation of continuum
wavefunctions.  Such methods do not provide a basis for a theoretical
description of photoelectron angular distributions, or of Auger electron
emission.  A fully numerical method of evaluating molecular continuum functions
has been reported recently (Richards and Larkins 1984, 1986).  It has been
previously applied to calculate photoionisation phenomena associated with
the hydrogen molecule and the hydrogen molecule ion.  In this paper the
numerical method has been used to calculate continuum functions for the
determination of photoionisation cross sections, angular distribution
parameters and Auger transition probabilities associated with the lithium
molecule.  The photoionisation findings are compared with atomic cross
sections.  The work provides a basis for the reinterpretation of the
photoemission data of Krummacher et al. (1982) and Gerard (1984).
  Photoionisation of the lithium dimer Li2 is of fundamental importance.
Theoretically Li2 is the electronically simplest stable homonuclear
diatomic molecule after H2.  It has a large internuclear equilibrium
separation of 5.052 a.u.  The ground state electronic structure   
contains both core and valence electrons.  Previous investigations of the
electronic properties of Li2 have tended to concentrate on bound state
calculations of ground and excited Li2, and valence hole states of Li2, 
due to the interest in Li2 for laser use (Harris 1980; Hyman and Mani 1977).  
The most important theoretical contribution has been the series of 
multiconfiguration self-consistent field (MCSCF) studies by Konowalow 
and coworkers (Konowalow and Fish 1984; and references therein). Reviews 
of this area are given by Schmidt-Mink et al. (1985) and Hessel and Vidal 
(1979).  The present work on Li2 continuum processes complements the
existing bound state work.
  There has been only one previous calculation of either core or valence
photoionisation in Li2 namely, the multiple scattering calculation of
Davenport et al. (1983).  The corresponding photoionisation of atomic Li
has been studied more extensively.  Both core (Amusia et al. 1976; Larkins
et al. 1981, 1986; de Alti et al. 1983) and valence (McDowell and Chang
1969; Chang and Poe 1975; Bhatia et al. 1975;  Tiwari et al. 1977; Sukumar
and Kulander 1978) studies have been reported.
  The Li2 molecule is also the simplest diatomic molecule in which Auger
emission processes are significant.  Although little is known experimentally
or theoretically about the Li2 Auger processes, Li2 is a convenient
system on which to test the two-dimensional numerical continuum method.
Calculations of the Auger transition rates are presented herein.

 2. Theory (a) Photoionisation cross section  

  The cross section for photoionisation of a system in initial state `i'
by an unpolarised photon beam of energy hv, ejecting a photoelectron of
energy    leaving the system in final state `f' is given by  (1)  
where    is the fine-structure constant,    is the Bohr radius
and    is the statistical weight of the initial discrete state. 
The ionisation energy    and the photoelectron energy    are in
atomic units, and    is in units of Mb   .  Within the
dipole approximation the transition moment    is given by     (2)  
where    and    are the total initial- and
final-state functions, respectively, for the N-electron system and   
is the one-electron dipole operator.  If the wavefunctions   
and    are exact, there are two equivalent forms of the dipole
operator:    (length form) and    (velocity form).
When non-exact wavefunctions are used in practice, the forms are no longer
formally equivalent.  For diagram photoionisation processes, especially
those involving the lowest member of a state manifold, it can be shown (Manson
1976; Richards and Larkins 1983) that generally no one form is to be preferred.
In practice, both forms should be evaluated, since the agreement between
the forms provides one measure of the quality of the calculation.
  In a Hartree-Fock treatment the initial state is represented by a
single-configuration state function (CSF)    (N) and the final
state by the CSF,    (N), where   
Here    (N) is the antisymmetrised product of the final ion CSF   
(N - 1) with the continuum function    which is normalised to unit 
outgoing energy.

 (b) Photoionisation angular distribution  

  Photoionisation by an electric dipole interaction between linearly polarised
radiation and randomly oriented target molecules (Yang 1948; Cooper and
Zare 1969) gives rise to a differential cross section of the form   
where    is the angle-integrated total cross section,    is
the ejection angle of the photoelectron relative to the polarisation vector
of the incident radiation, and   . The angular distribution 
is determined completely by the asymmetry parameter    the value of 
which is physically confined to the range   .  The analysis by Tully 
et al. (1968) gives the vibrationally and rotationally unresolved differential 
cross section of a linear molecule as       
and hence       
                                                                    
The quantum numbers L and    asymptotically characterise the final state
continuum angular momentum states;    and    are the magnetic
quantum numbers of the initial state and the final ion core state respectively,
   are Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, and    is the incident 
photon energy.  The asymmetry parameter for a given system is then 
determined by the continuum phase shifts    and dipole transition 
moments    for each of the allowed final state continuum channels.  
The phase shifts are fixed by the asymptotic radial form of the continuum 
wavefunction, which is the Coulomb function (Abramowitz 1972) with argument 
    where    is the photoelectron momentum and    is the net charge on the final state molecular core.  The transition moments are given by
       

  In the present work expressions for    and    are required for
photoionisation from a    or    initial state orbital. 
Expressions for the    case are given elsewhere (Richards and Larkins
1986).  By writing the interaction term as    and including terms up to L = 5, the expressions for    in the    case with    are      

 (c) Li2 continuum wavefunction evaluation  

  The details of the two-dimensional numerical treatment of molecular continuum
wavefunctions have been outlined previously (Richards and Larkins 1984, 1986).
At the Hartree-Fock level the equation to describe a continuum electron
of energy    in the field of a bound-state molecular core comprising 
(N - 1) electrons, abbreviated    is   
where          

Here the subscript    refers to atomic nuclei (of charge    
in the molecule, and the subscript j refers to the bound-state orbitals;
   represents the molecular Coulomb potential and    represents 
the molecular exchange potential, and the coefficients    and    
are characterised by the symmetry of the total N-electron state (Roothaan 1960).
  The numerical treatment consists of performing a conventional algebraic
basis set calculation on the initial and final ionic core bound states and
then solving for the photoelectron continuum wavefunction numerically, in
the relaxed Hartree-Fock ion core potential derived from the bound state
calculation.
  In the present work an (11s,6p) uncontracted gaussian set from Huzinaga 
and coworkers was used for the Hartree-Fock initial and final ion core bound
state calculations (11s from Huzinaga et al. 1971; 6p from Huzinaga 1965).
The cross section and angular distribution results reported here correspond
to the use of the relaxed Hartree-Fock model.

                                      
 (d) Auger transition rates  

  The Auger process involves a radiationless transition between a highly
excited initial (N - 1) -electron state    and a final state
   consisting of an (N - 2)-electron bound state and a free
Auger electron of energy   

                            

The many-electron Hamiltonian of a system undergoing a radiationless transition
is given by

                            

where
 
                            

is the Coulomb interaction between electron pairs,

                            

is the remainder of the nonrelativistic Hamiltonian, and    is the
relativistic spin-orbit interaction.  The transition probability for an
Auger transition from    to    is given from first order 
perturbation theory (Wentzel 1927) by

                            

where    is the energy density of states about the final state energy.
  The Auger transition can be treated in various coupling schemes, either
Russell-Saunders, jj, or intermediate coupling (Asaad and Burhop 1958).
For the molecules of interest in the present work consisting of low Z
nuclei, Russell-Saunders coupling applies, that is    and S are conserved
in the transition for linear molecules, and a nonrelativistic treatment
is appropriate.  In the nonrelativistic limit the perturbation in the
transition operator (18) reduces to the Coulomb interaction between the
electrons participating in the transition.  In the Hartree-Fock approximation,
single configuration state functions are used to represent    and 
  :

                           

                           

If different orbital sets are used to construct the bound states
   and    the transition probability expression
(18) becomes complex to evaluate, although the appropriate formalism exists
(Howat et al.1978).  If, however, a frozen core approximation is made, in
which the final state is constructed from the initial state orbital set,
the transition probability reduces to an expression in terms of the Coulomb
and exchange integrals (Siegbahn et al. 1975)

                             

involving the continuum orbital    the final state orbital    
in which a vacancy is present in the initial state ion, and the initial 
state orbitals    and    which correspond to the vacancies 
produced in the final state by the ejection of the Auger electron and the 
filling of the existing initial state vacancy.  Expressions for the transition 
probability are given by Agren (1981) for both initially closed and open shell 
molecules.

 3. Results (a) Li2 cross sections  

  Photoionisation cross sections and angular distributions were calculated
for the core ionisation processes

                       

                       

and for the valence ionisation process

                       

The ground state equilibrium geometry of R = 5.052 a.u. (Huber and Herzberg
1979) was used in all calculations.  The bound state SCF wavefunctions were
evaluated using an uncontracted (11s, 6p) gaussian basis set, as mentioned
previously.  The final core state was described in a relaxed orbital approach.
Calculations were performed using the UIBMOL SCF program package (Faegri
and Manne 1976).  The total SCF energies for the molecular states are given
in Table 1.  While lower total energies result from multiconfiguration
calculations which include correlation (Schwarz et al. 1978; Bacskay et al.
1986) the SCF approach was considered adequate to generate the N - 1 electron
potential required for the determination of molecular continuum functions.
  The calculated    SCF ionisation energies for photoemission from
1    1    and 2    orbitals are 64.68, 64.63 and 
4.38 eV respectively.  These theoretical values have been used for specifying
ionisation thresholds required for the transition moment calculations. 
The only ionisation energy known experimentally with reasonable confidence
is the 2    adiabatic ionisation potential of 5.14 eV (Eisel et al.1983;
Bernheim et al. 1983) which is not directly comparable with the Franck-Condon
value.

                    

  The photoionisation properties for continuum angular momentum states to
L = 5 for u symmetry and to L = 4 for g symmetry at photoelectron energies
up to 6.0 a.u. have been determined.  As in previous work L coupling between
the exit channels has been neglected.  The Li2 ground state equilibrium
bond length of over 5 a.u. is one of the largest of the first row diatomics.
It is significantly longer than for the diatomic molecules    
and    which we have considered previously using the numerical 
method.  From the physical point of view it is of interest to assess the extent to which the ionisation process retains atomic-like character at this large internuclear separation. From the numerical point of view, however, the large bond length is troublesome. It means that a finer grid spacing is needed and, since the molecular potential approaches its asymptotic form more slowly, the grid must extend further. Moreover, the larger bond length causes the influence of L coupling in the continuum wavefunction to be larger. The overall result is that for numerical calculations of a given size, lower numerical accuracy is obtained for Li2 cross sections than for H2 or H2. Various numerical (r, θ) grid arrangements were used, with grid spacings h  0.051-0.084 a.u. and    and boundary values   . The Li2 exchange potential calculation converged more slowly than the H2 calculation, and 5-15 iterations were generally necessary compared with 3-10 for the H2 molecule.
            
