The genus Pyxine (Physciaceae, lichenized ascomycetes) in Australia By R.W. Rogers Abstract  

Following morphological, anatomical and chemical studies, 15 species of
Pyxine (Physciaceae, lichenized ascomycetes) are recorded for Australia.
Their classification, distribution and habitats are discussed.  The following
taxa are reduced to synonymy: Pyxine cocoes var. endoxantha Mull. Arg. and
P. meissneri var. rinodinoides Vainio with P. berteriana (Fee) Imshaug;
P. brachyloba Mull. Arg., P. nitidula Mull. Arg. and P. microspora Vainio with
P. minuta Vainio; P. meissneri var. convexula Malme, P. albida Magnusson and P.
pringlei Imshaug with P. petricola; P. meissneri var. subobscurascens Malme 
with P. pungens Zahlbr.; P. retirugella var. laevior Vainio, P. retirugella 
var. capitata zahibr., P. copelandii Vainio, P. asiatica Vainio, and P. 
patellaris Kurok. with P. retirugella Nyl.; and P. prominula Stirton
with P. cocoes (Sw.) Nyl. The new species P. isidiolenta R.W. Rogers is
described and the new name P. linearis R.W. Rogers is proposed for P. 
retirugella var. endoxantha forma sorediosa Mull. Arg.

 Introduction  

  The genus Pyxine was established by Elias Fries in 1825 with Lecidea
sorediata Ach. as its type species.  He placed Pyxine in the tribe Pyxinae
along with Umbilicaria, the common character being a naked proper exciple.
By 1885 Nylander had recognized four species in the genus, with essentially
the same delimitation as now: a small foliose lichen with black apothecia
usually without algae in the margin; spores thick-walled, brown and two-celled.
  Pyxine is one of a number of genera similar in thallus size and morphology
(Pyxine, Physcia, Dirinaria and Physconia) in the Physciaceae.  Fertile material
of Pyxine can be distinguished from the others easily, for in sections of
the apothecium the epithecium reacts K faint purple-violet. Both Dirinaria
and Pyxine have a dark hypothecium which is not present in the other genera
and Pyxine, unlike Physcia, Dirinaria or Physconia, often has apothecia
with a margin devoid of algae.  The apothecial margin in Pyxine is not
lecideine as reported in some earlier papers, but is a modified lecanorine
structure (Swinscow and Krog 1975a).
  Sterile material is more difficult to determine but Pyxine does have a
number of attributes that help to identify specimens.  First, many species
contain lichexanthone in the upper cortex, and therefore react UV gold;
no other foliose Physciaceae show this.  Species of Dirinaria tend to have
lobes which fuse laterally, which no Pyxine does.  Many Pyxine species develop
pseudocyphellae which show as white lines on the margins of the thallus
or on the upper cortex, where they may form a reticulate pattern: such
pseudocyphellae are not found in the other genera.  The chemistry of Pyxine
is also characteristic, all Pyxine species (except Pyxine nubila) producing
a range of triterpenes, but in association with norstictic acid. Dirinaria also
produces triterpines, but in association withdivaricatic or sekikaic acids.
  It is clear that Dirinaria is the genus closest to Pyxine in terms of
both apothecial structure and chemistry.  Both Dirinaria and Pyxine are
genera of the tropics and subtropics, and have at times been combined (e.g.
Stirton 1898).  Examination of collections from the Brisbane area showed
that the genus Pyxine in Australia was in need of careful study, although
a great deal of ground work had already been done by Stirton (1898), Imshaug
(1957), Swinscow and Krog (1975a, 1975c) and Kashiwadani (1977a-1977c).

 Materials and Methods  

  In this study taxa have been delimited by examination of a large number
of Australian collections of Pyxine.  Having established the number of species
in Australia, and what are the limits of their variation, type materials
from Australia and elsewhere were examined in order to find appropriate
names for the species.  The result is a relatively broad species concept,
with the type sometimes representing an extreme variant of the taxon as
in the case of Pyxine retirugella.  The species description given here are,
therefore, not descriptions of the type but a description which circumscribes
the taxa as they appear in the Australian environment.
  Most of the material examined was collected by the author or by Nell Stevens.
Collections were borrowed from other Australian herberia, CANB, NSW, MEL,
BRI, PERTH, and the herbarium of Dr J.A. Elix in the Chemistry Department
of Australian National University, abbreviated CANUC.  The Australian material
in BM was examined and that in G borrowed for study.  If no location is
indicated specimens are housed in BRIU.
  Full synonymies are not given: those names reported for Australia are
disposed of, and synonyms discovered during the study indicated.  Many
additional synonyms based on modern species concepts are reported by Swinscow
and Krog (1975a).
  Type specimens were kindly made available for this study by BM, G, FH,
UPS, O, W, H, S, GLAM, TNS, TUR and C.
  All specimens were examined under u.v. light and where material permitted,
thin-layer chromatography (TLC) and microchemical spot tests were performed
on the thallus.

 Thallus Morphology   

  The thallus is normally composed of neatly radiating subdichotomous to
linear lobes, although irregular substrates and age disturb this pattern.
The lobes are often noticeably crenate or complicate along the margins.
They are commonly more or less flat, although P. convexior and P. pungens
are characterized by convex lobes.  The colour of the lobes is fairly uniform
white to pearl grey or dull yellow.  (Colour terminology is after Kornerup
and Wanscher 1967.)  The lower surface is black, except in P. nubila, usually
with plentiful, well developed black rhizines.
  Soredia, pustules and isidia occur in a continuum in this genus.  The
intermediate forms have been noted by Kashiwadani (1977a) and by Swinscow and 
Krog (1975a).  Some species show well developed soralia, which may be orbicular 
and laminal as in some P. retirugella collections (Fig. 4) or orbicular
and pedicillate as in others.  The closely related P. consocians shows pustules,
often with proliferating tissue on the margins.  P. subcinerea shows marginal
soralia that appear to develop from the marginal pseudocyphellae, often
spreading continuously along lobe margins (Fig. 9) but in other cases remaining
discrete.  P. cocoes produces laminal and marginal erose soralia (Fig. 5)
which may form extensive sorediate patches.  In P. sorediata the soredia
are marginal and very coarse, although sometimes they are restricted to
the tips of marginal lobules and may look rather like insidia (Figs 6 and
7).  The soredia of P. coccifera have their origin in the pseudocyphellae
and are brilliant red (Fig. 8).
  Soralia are sometimes restricted to older parts of the thallus, with
extensive non-sorediate areas near the perimeter.  Great care must therefore
be taken when looking for soralia, and very small thalli ought to be matched
to both sorediate and non-sorediate descriptions.
  In the Australian material only P. isidiolenta shows true isidia.  In this
species the isidia are thin somewhat branched cylindrical structures (Fig. 10).
Isidium-like pustules are developed in P. consocians (Fig. 11).
  Pseudocyphellae are common in a number of species but the degree of
development is very variable.  Species should not be separated on differing
degrees of pseudocyphellation as the character varies greatly from lobe
to lobe on the same thallus.  Marginal pseudocyphellae, which appear as
a white line along the margin of the lobe, are especially common.  They
often carry over onto the upper surface as short white lines (Fig. 12) which
may link up irregularly or more or less reticulately (Fig. 13).  In some
cases the pseudocyphellae develop as cracks or splits between ridges.  This
is particularly marked in the P. retirugella complex, in which the type of
P. retirugella shows an extreme development of reticulate pseudocyphellae.
P. coccifera commonly shows deeply split pseudocyphellae (Fig. 8).
  Colour of the medulla is fairly constant within a species.  Three colours
can usually be distinguished: white, yellow and buff.  In P. coccifera, the
medulla is white except immediately under the pseudocyphellae where it is
red.
  Pruina is present in most species, the amount varying from specimen to
specimen and lobe to lobe.  It may be present in continuous sheets, e.g. in 
P. cocoes (Fig. 14), or only in a sparse scatter of crystals as in P. linearis
(Fig. 15).
  
 Apothecium Morphology  

  Variation in apothecium morphology has been well discussed by Swinscow
and Krog (1975a) and there is little to add.  It is clear that the nature
of the margin of the apothecium is variable, sometimes with an apparently
thalloid margin and sometimes without one.  The margin is in all cases
lecanorine but often without algae and carbonized, thus appearing lecideine.
In the past many species have been created on the grounds of a margin coloured
like the thallus or not; such separations are spurious, a single thallus
often having apothecia of both forms.  The presence of an `internal stipe'
(Imshaug 1957) has been found to be a useful taxonomic attribute.

 Chemistry  

  Cortical chemistry is an important taxonomic character in Pyxine, the
presence or absence of atranorin or lichexanthone being a useful character
for identifying species.
  Medullary chemistry is variable within and between species.  The medulla
may contain norstictic acid, testacein, triterpenes and pigments.  Testacein
is the unknown UV substance reported by Swinscow and Krog (1975a), first
isolated from Parmelia testacea (J.A. Elix, personal communication).
Triterpenes are present in all species except P. nubila, but in variable
quantities.  They appear to be constant or present as only a limited number
of variants in a species.
  Medullary chemistry is regarded here as a confirmatory character only.
Neither the presence or absence of norstictic acid or testacein nor a different
pattern of triterpenes was considered sufficient in itself to separate species.
In this respect the treatment of chemistry in this study is akin to that
of Swinscow and Krog (1975b) in their treatment of Usnea rather than their
account of Pyxine in East Africa (Swinscow and Krog 1975a).  Permitting
chemical variation within species has had particular significance in the
P. retirugella and P. minuta complexes, in which fewer species are recognized
than would be if the criteria used in some other studies (e.g. Swinscow and
Krog 1975a; Kashiwadani 1977a) were applied.
  The chemistry of the species discussed in this paper is presented in Fig. 1.

 Distribution patterns  

  Virtually all of the collections of Pyxine made in Australia are from
a narrow band near the coast.  They were gathered mostly along the east
coast except for a small number of collections from the north and north-west,
two from the extreme south-west and one from Tasmania (Fig. 2).
  If the coastal strip is divided into segments representing climatic regions
and the total number of species of Pyxine present in each is accumulated
(Fig. 2), it is apparent that the genus shows its greatest development in
the tropics and subtropics, which have a more or less year-round rainfall.
A number of species is also known from the `Wet-Dry' tropics, a region with
an extreme winter drought and a relatively short wet summer season.
  Only one species occurs in the cool-temperate region, Pyxine nubila, known
only from a single site in Tasmania.  One species, P. subcinerea, has a disjunct
distribution from southern New South Wales to the far south-west of Western
Australia.
  On the maps of individual species it is likely that any disjunctions apparent
along the eastern and southern coasts where collections of lichens are numerous
represent real distribution gaps.  However, gaps along the northern coast
(e.g. in the Gulf of Carpentaria) may represent gaps in collection rather
than distribution.
  The distribution of Pyxine in Australia (Fig. 3) can be explained in climatic
terms.  The genus occurs only in those areas which are at least seasonally
humid and wet and warm simultaneously.  This explains the absence of Pyxine
from the inland, from the south-central coast and the western coast, which
have a cool wet winter and a dry summer or are uniformly dry all year round.
Exceptions to this are Tasmania, where a single collection of P. nubila (Fig. 3F)
is known from a region which is uniformly cool and moist, and the extreme
south-west of Western Australia where P. subcinerea occurs (arrowed in Fig. 3J).
  In the north the seasons are strongly differentiated with a warm, very
dry winter and a hot wet summer.  This climate supports a number of species,
one of which (P. coccifera, Fig. 3B) is restricted to the region.  

