<sample>
	<id> J16 </id>
	


	<note> 2016 words </note>
	


	<source> The Australian Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport - March 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Growth hormone </h>
	


	<bl> By Stephen P. Haynes </bl>
	


	<h> ABSTRACT </h>
	
Haynes, S.P. (1986) Review: Growth Hormone Australian Journal of Science
and Medicine in Sport 18(1): 3.15.
Human growth hormone, secreted by the pituitary gland, is the major hormone
responsible for post-natal somatic growth. It acts on a variety of tissues
including bone, cartilage and muscle, mediating anabolic, diabetogenic and
lipolytic processes. The secretion of growth hormone is modulated principally
by two hypothalamic hormones - somatostatin and growth hormone releasing
hormone and stimulated by a number of factors including exercise, deep sleep,
hypoglycaemia and the infusion of amino acids. Growth hormone is used in
the treatment of growth hormone deficient children. It is prepared by
extraction from cadaver pituitaries and it is currently in extremely short
supply. Growth hormone is now used in sport in an attempt to enhance athletic
performance, a situation that may be aggravated by the availability of
synthetic growth hormone produced by recombinant DNA techniques.

The use of hormones in the treatment of a variety of endocrine deficiency
states is well-known, and includes the use of insulin in diabetes mellitus,
thyroxine and cretinism, androgens in primary hypogonadism and human growth
hormone in idiopathic and organic growth hormone deficiency. The use of
hormonal agents by athletes in an attempt to enhance performance became
evident several decades ago. Initially anabolic steroids, synthetic derivations
of testosterone, were used, but as drug control procedures were instigated
their use was supplemented by endogenous androgens, particularly testosterone,
or hormones that stimulate androgen production, primarily human chorionic
gonadotrophin. More recently human growth hormone has been added to the
arsenal of doping agents used in sport principally because of its reported
effects on anabolic processes in a variety of tissues including muscle.
This review provides topical information on growth hormone, including
biochemical and physiological aspects, the use and abuse of growth hormone
and the clinical manifestation of excess and deficiency states. It will
provide fundamental knowledge for all health care professionals, particularly
those concerned with discouraging the use of doping agents in sport.
 

	<h> BIOCHEMISTRY AND METABOLISM OF GROWTH HORMONE </h>
	
Human growth hormone (hGH) is not homogenous but is a mixture of a number
of peptides, the major one being a single chain of 191 amino acids containing
two disulphide bridges, with a molecular weight of approximately 22,000 (Niall
1971).
  Growth hormone is synthesised and stored in the somatotrophes of the anterior
lobe of the pituitary gland. These cells comprise over a third of the gland 
and contain 5 to 10 milligrams of growth hormone, making it the most abundant
hormone in the pituitary. The genes responsible for hGH biosynthesis are 
located on the long arm of chromosome17. The daily production rate of hGH 
approximates 0.5 mgs/24 hours/m2 in normal females (Thompsons et al 1972) and 
0.4 mgs/24hrs/m2 in adult males (Alford et al 1973). The secretion rate
in adolescence is about 0.7 mgs/24hrs compared to 0.1 mgs/24hrs in the
pre-pubertal state (Finkelstein et al 1972). Although the metabolic clearance
rate (MCR) is usually constant in individuals there is much variation between
individuals (Thompson et al 1972). In addition upright posture decreases
the MCR by 24% (Alford et al 1973). A MCR of 170 litres/24hrs/m2
approximates most reported estimates (Franchimont and Burger 1975). The
disappearance rate of hGH from plasma is multiexponential (Cameron et al
1969) and therefore the significance of half life estimates of 20 to 30
minutes is difficult to state. There are marked fluctuations in blood levels
of hGH throughout a twenty-four hour period, peak levels occurring within
the first two hours of sleep. Twenty-four hour integrated concentrations
are about 3 mgs/L in adult males and females. However, mean levels in puberty
(Tanner, stage 5) of 7.7 mgs/L are higher than mean levels of 5.7 mg/L (in
puberty Tanner State 2.4) or prepubertals. Levels decline significantly
in the second decade of life (Zadik et al 1985).
  

	<h> ACTIONS OF GROWTH HORMONE </h>
	
Growth hormone is the major hormone responsible for post-natal somatic growth
and acts on a variety of tissues. The growth promoting actions of hGH on
muscle and skeletal tissues are insulinlike whereas the diabetogenic effects
on carbohydrate metabolism and the lipolytic effects on fat oppose those
of insulin. Similarly the actions of cortisol on muscle and cartilage are
catabolic inhibiting the actions of hGH whereas cortisol and hGH are
synergistic in promoting diabetogenic and lipolytic effects. Simplistically,
growth hormone directly affects carbohydrate and lipid metbolism whereas
the anabolic actions are mediated through somatomedin-like peptides.
  Growth can occur by cellular proliferation (hyperplasia) or by hypertrophy
with concomitant synthesis of differentiated cell products. Somatomedins
can stimulate cell proliferation in some tissues, differentiation without
proliferation in others, and in all responding target tissues, the production
of characteristic cell products. In muscle, for example, somatomedins stimulate
both the proliferation of myoblasts and their differentiation into myotubes
(Ewton and Florin 1980). In cultured chondrocytes DNA synthesis is stimulated
during the log growth phase until growth to high density has occurred when
the components of cartilage matrix, particularly proteoglycan, are stimulated
(Hill 1979). Somatomedins mimic some of the effects of insulin. The
insulin-like actions include increased intracellular transport of glucose
(Hall and Uthne 1971) and its incorporation into glycogen and total fat
in the epididymal fat pad (Stern et al 1969), oxidation of glucose to carbon
dioxide (Hall 1972) and inhibition of glycerol release in adipose tissue
(Underwood et al 1972). Furthermore insulin has been shown to mimic some
effects of somatomedin in cartilage including the stimulation of collagen
and chondroitin sulphate synthesis (Salmon et al 1967) and the uptake of
nucleic acids into RNA and DNA (Salmon et al 1968). These similar actions
relate to the fact that insulin will bind to IGF I receptors and IGF I will
bind to insulin receptors. Two receptors in fact, mediate the actions of
somatomedins, one preferentially binding IGF I and the other IGF II.
Exogenously administered somatomedin can stimulate growth in the intact
animal (van Buull-Offers et al 1979). Both insulin-like growth factor I
and II stimulate growth when administered by implanted osmotic pump over
a six-day period (Schoenle et al 1982).
  A number of direct actions of growth hormone on isolated tissues has been
observed including RNA synthesis, plasma protein synthesis and somatomedin
release in the liver (Jefferson and Korner 1967; Griffin and Miller 1974;
McConaghey and Sledge 1970), amino acid transport and incorporation in muscle
(Kostyo et al 1959), lipolysis in rat adipocytes (Fain et al 1965), DNA
synthesis and sulphate incorporation in chondrocytes (Madsen et al 1983),
somatostatin secretion from hypothalamii (Berelowitz et al 1981) and 
replication of hepatocytes in culture (Moon et al 1962). In growth hormone
deficient rats GH administration initiates an increase in glucose uptake
in muscle or adipose tissues accompanied by an increased uptake of amino
acids and fatty acids and inhibition of lipolysis. This is followed by
increased hepatic glucose output, decreased glucose uptake, stimulation
of lipolysis and increased peripheral utilisation of fatty acids and 
stimulation of protein synthesis, the overall effect being protein anabolism,
glucose sparing and fatty acid metabolism (Goodman 1968).
  Specific receptors for human growth hormone are present on liver membranes,
adipocytes, fibroblasts and lymphocytes. However, the early events following
activation of the growth hormone receptor remain unclear (Hughes and Friesen
1985). The administration of hGH to hypopituitary patients has an immediate 
insulin-like action that results in transient hypoglycaemia. The continued 
administration of hGH antagonises the peripheral action of insulin. This 
results in increased insulin secretion after glucose ingestion. Growth 
hormone may also have a direct action on pancreatic islets to increase B-cell 
secretory capacity and in certain circumstances to promote B-cell 
hyperplasia. Prolonged elevation of hGH levels as occurs in acromegaly, 
can lead to diabetes in susceptible patients because insulin secretory 
capacity is not sufficient to overcome the growth hormone induced insulin 
resistance.
  After hGH administration, the oxidative energy lost through diversion
of amino acids from oxidative to anabolic pathways and promotion of hepatic
and muscular glycogenesis is balanced by increased lipolysis and fatty acid
oxidation. This lowers the respiratory quotient and promotes ketogenesis.
Clinically the lipolytic effect of hGH is evident in hypopituitary dwarfs
as a loss of subcutaneous fat during the early months of hGH treatment.
Growth hormone deficient children have a decreased number of muscle cells.
This is normalised following hGH administration, indicating a stimulating
effect of the hormone on cell division (Brasel and Cheek 1968; Check et
al 1970; Cheek and Hill 1970).
 

	<h> REGULATION OF GROWTH HORMONE SECRETION </h>
	
The regulation of growth hormone secretion is shown in Figure 1 and includes
adrenergic and cholinergic mechanisms, two hypothalamic hormones -
somatostatin and growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) - and substances
emanating principally from the liver termed somatomedins. The secretion
of the hypothalamic hormones somatostatin and GHRH which regulates hGH
secretion is modulated by a complex network of neurotransmitters (Muller
1979). Cholinergic mediation is probably the most important since growth
hormone secretion in response to arginine, clonidine, and physical exercise
can be blocked by atropine, a muscarinic cholinergic receptor blocker
(Casanueva 1984). Whether acetylcholine mediates hGH secretion by stimulation
of GHRH or inhibition of somatostatin remains unclear.
  Somatostatin or growth hormone release inhibiting factor was first isolated
by Krulich et al (1968) and later sequenced as a cyclic peptide containing
fourteen amino acids - S14 (Brazeau 1973). Somatostatin (S14) is in fact
a member of a family of peptides that inhibit not only the pituitary secretion
of growth hormone and thyrotrophin (TSH) but also a number of gastrointestinal
and pancreatic hormones. Somatostatin is secreted into the portohypophyseal
circulation and binds to pituitary somatotrophic cell plasma membranes to
affect growth hormone secretion.
  The existence of growth hormone releasing hormone, recently termed
somatocrinin (Guillemin 1983), was first demonstrated in 1964 (Deuben and
Meites 1964) and more recently a number of active peptides have been
characterised from human pancreatic tumors (Rivier et al 1982; Guillemin
1982) including a 44 amino amide (GRF 44, GHRH 1-44NH2) and the free
acids of the first 37 and 40 amino acids (GRH 37, GHRH 1-37, GRF 40, GHRH
1.40 OH). The molecular weights of these peptides approximates 13.000.
Intravenous bolus injection of GHRH will elicit a prompt and significant
rise of hGH (Gelato et al 1983). However, as with luteinising hormone releasing
hormone (Haynes et al 1985), for physiological effect GHRH may depend on
pulsatile secretion since sustained infusions of GHRH over several hours
produce a decrease in hGH levels (Goldman et al 1984).
  Some effects of growth hormone are meditated by inducing the secretion
of a group of substances, principally from the liver and kidney, termed
somatomedins or insulin-like growth factors (IGF) (Clemmons and Van Wyk
1981; Daughaday 1981). Of particular interest are somatomedin C or insulin
like growth factor I (IGF I) and insulinlike growth factor II (IGF II).
IGF I is a straight chain basic 70 amino acid peptide (Rinderknecht and
Humbel 1978) whereas IGF II is a neutral peptide being less dependent on
growth hormone secretion than IGF I. In addition to the actions first observed
on cartilage (Salmon and Daughaday 1957) somatomedins may also play an
important role in growth hormone feedback mechanisms by stimulating
somatostatin production (Berelowitz et al 1981) and inhibiting growth hormone
synthesis in response to GHRH (Brazeau et al 1982).
                                                         

	<h> STIMULI TO GROWTH HORMONE SECRETION </h>
	
There are a number of neuronal hormonal and metabolic stimuli to growth
hormone secretion as summarised in Table 1. Hypoglycaemia is a significant
stimulus (Roth et al 1963, Greenwood et al 1966) (Figure 2), a reduction
of blood glucose by only 25% being sufficient to stimulate hGH release even
though there may be no subjective signs of hypoglycaemia. The release of
growth hormone is of short duration and is normalised as blood glucose returns
to control levels. In contrast oral glucose administration leads to a reduction
in growth hormone levels within two hours (Roth et al 1963). Hyperglycaemia
attenuates the response of hGH to GHRH (Masuda et al 1985). These effects are
probably mediated by glucoreceptors in the ventromedial nucleus of the
hypothalamus. Cholinergic mechanisms are unlikely since growth hormone
release induced by hypoglycaemia is not diminished by cholinergic blockade
(Mendelson et al 1978; Blackard and Waddell 1969).


</sample>
