Modelling examination marks D.J. Daley and E. Seneta Summary  
The paper proposes a model to describe marks as awarded to students who
select and sit for examinations in a subset of the courses offered.
  For each subject a linear transformation of the raw marks is sought so
as to place all marks on a common scale. In this guise, the set-up reduces
to a simple linear model with multiplicative interaction term, totally lacking
in balance as would results from experimental design practice.
  A variety of methods of estimating the linear transformation parameters
is described.

 O. Introduction  
The main object of this paper is to exhibit and study some properties
of a simple stochastic model which facilitates the study of data sets
consisting of examination marks.
  At the end of secondary schooling in Australia a student is usually provided
with a certificate indicating his achievements at that stage relative to
others within the same system. Usually, the certificate includes a few (usually
in the region of 4 to 7) course scores which decades ago were examination
marks but nowadays may include or consist entirely of some form of school-based
assessment. These  course scores have usually been moderated from the raw
course score data, the aim of this operation being to produce scores which
can be compared "fairly" or "equitably" across subjects, and hence (so it
is argued) can be summed to form a student's aggregate score as the sum
of his best v moderated course scores for some fixed number v.
  Different educational systems have different schemes for moderating the
raw scores, and have different rules governing formation of the aggregate.
The main purpose of the model proffered below is to provide a framework
within which different moderation procedures can be compared as statistical
procedures. It is used here to illustrate versions of three existing
procedures.
  Clearly the availability of an appropriate model makes simulation a possible
technique for the empirical investigation of its applicability. The model
itself (see equation (1.3) of the text) can be viewed as a single factor model
associated with the name of Spearman (see e.g. Section 1.2 of Lawley and
Maxwell (1971). In this context, it must be noted that preliminary examination
of data suggests that, in spite of this one factor being quite dominant and i
nterpretable as a general level of ability/achievement, a further factor akin 
to a contrast of quantitative and verbal abilities may also be identifiable.
Neither of these matters is pursued in the sequel.
  The moderating procedures of various examining bodies are documented mostly
as internal memoranda and they are not necessarily available to the general
academic community. Yet such procedures are widespread (e.g. Broyden (1983),
Murgatroyd (1975, 1979), Smith (1971); all of these are encompassed by the
model below or special variants of it). Comprehensive documentation of
Australasian experiences is overdue (cf. Cooney (1976).
 1. Notation and the Model 
  We are concerned with a finite population of candidates, i=1,...,N, each
taking a selection from the courses j=1,...,S. We write    if candidate i
takes course j, =0 otherwise. When    we denote by    the raw course 
score of candidate i in course j. Moderated course scores    are taken to 
be given by an appropriate linear transformation of the raw course score for 
each course. Thus, if   
  
for some course parameters      . An important empirical observation
is that correlation  coefficients of raw course scores      
for distinct courses j,k taken over their common candidature i, are positive
(usually, in the range 0.3 to 0.7). On the basis of this, the crucial
assumption is made that appropriately moderated scores    can be placed (apart
from random error) on a common scale furnished for individual i by some
unobservable value vi which can be interpreted as representing a general
measure of i's achievements, or alternatively, i's ability. Thus, when
  
  
where the residual random variables    are assumed to have   
   and to be uncorrelated amongst themselves. Here and below 
(e.g. (2.1b), (2.4a)) the notation    and    refers to variances (as 
second moments of random variables) whereas       
      refer to formal moment expressions defined on 
finite sets of numbers.
  Substituting from (1.1) into (1.2) the model becomes
  
where    so       say, with    
for distinct (i,j) uncorrelated, and we regard          as unknown parameters.
  In the language of experimental design, (1.3) is a model with multiplicative
interaction term, but there is complete absence of balance so our analysis
is necessarily ad hoc. For purposes of statistical inference, further
conditions, such as normality, may need to be imposed on the eij's.
Krishnaiah & Yochmowitz (1980) surveys such questions in the case of a balanced
design and allowing for more general structure of the interaction term.

 2. Moments  
From (1.3) it follows that, if   
  
  
i=1,..., N; j=1,...,S.
  Writing    for the number of candidates taking course j, we introduce
formal moments with respect to i or j as illustrated by
    
    .
Thus,
    
    .
  From (2.1a) it follows that
  
or equivalently from (1.2),
    .  
Linearity gives us another equivalent form, namely
    .  
Also, from (2.1),
    
where we have used (2.2a). Thus,
    .  
  As the variance analogue of (2.2a) and which we regard as a manifestation
of the double expectation theorem we define
    
but it must be noted that this differs both from 
  
and of course from
    .  
  Finally we note that from the identities    we can construct
normalized linear expressions like both
  
and the minimum variance linear combination
    .  
  In the next three sections we outline approaches that have been (or, could
be) used to estimate in particular the parameters       with a
view to being able to form an aggregate score for i out of the totality
of moderated scores   . We shall find that the expressions developed
above at (2.2)-(2.5) concerning moments and formal moments have analogues
in equations for estimation in Section 3.

 3. Maximum Likelihood Estimation  
The strongest set of assumptions which we consider is that the r.v.s
   are independent normal r.v.s with zero mean and variance   . The 
log likelihood of the data set    is then given by
    .  
Differentiation with respect to          and    leads
in the usual manner to the following relations satisfied by the maximum
likelihood (ML) estimates             in terms of
the data set   :
    
    
    
    .  
  Clearly, these equations are just the analogues of (2.2a), (2.3), (2.4a)
and (2.5b) respectively. Consequently, the estimators in (ML.1-4) can be
regarded equivalently as moment estimators which do not in essence require
the additional assumption of normality imposed in the present section.
  It is relevant to later comparisons to note that the equations (ML.1-4)
can be written in terms of the ML-moderated course scores    the 
formal correlation coefficient 
    
and    as follows:
    
    
    
    .  
  Nothing has been said yet about existence or uniqueness of any solution
of (ML.1-4). These matters will be discussed later in Section 6. Digby (1979)
considered three algorithms for solving equations (ML.1), (ML.2) and (ML.4)
in the case that all    (and so (ML.3) does not arise).

 4. An Approach for Weighted Scores  
It is well known that, provided the variances    are known, the ML 
equations for          can be obtained by minimizing
    .  
Now it is not uncommon, in the formation of any aggregate, to have the course
score    contribute with the weight or unit value    which is
typically a smaller integer: in the present NSW system,    takes one
of the values 1, 2, 3 and 4, while in the ACT system it takes values 0.6,
1, 1.6 or 2. The weight may reflect either or both of the amount of work
being covered in course j and the extent of assessment (e.g. the amount
of examining). In the latter case it is plausible that the variance
   viewed as a measurement error of    should be inversely 
proportional to   . In other words, we would assume that    
where    is known, and then (4.1) becomes (apart from a multiplicative 
constant)
    .  
  Minimizing this last expression for S with respect to      
   we obtain least-squares (LS) or maximum likelihood estimators
         which satisfy
    
    
    
or equivalently, writing    
    
    
    
where    and    is the total number of units taken by candidate 
i. Clearly (LS.1) and (LS.3) resemble (ML.1) and (Ml.4), but the estimating 
equations for    and    differ in the role of the correlation coefficient. 
We discuss this point later in Section 5.
  A computational attraction of (LS.1-3) is that the reparametrization
   and    leads to a linear system of equations for the
estimates    and   . Thus, (LS.3) becomes
    
so (LS.2) becomes
    
using (4.3). Similarly, (LS.1) takes the form 
    
so (4.4) and (4.5) constitute a linear system for    and    can then be 
obtained from (4.3) if the linear system is soluble.

 5. A Bivariate Adjustment Procedure  
In Queensland, Western Australia, and the A.C.T. an essentially different
practice to either of those above is followed, though of course there are
modifications as to details in the different regions. The essence is that
the common scale values    are estimated in a separate test (the Australian 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (ASAT)). Thus, in contrast to the approaches of 
Sections 2-4, this component of the modertion procedure is external. Denoting 
these external estimates by    the course parameters       are then defined by 
    
   
because with these values, the ASAT-moderated course scores 
   
are then claimed to be on the common scale of the vi on account of
    
    .  
  Inspection shows that (5.3a) is of the same form as (ML'.1) and (LS'.1),
just as (5.1a) has the appearance of (ML.1) or (LS.1); indeed, (5.1a) can
be deduced from (LS.1) or (ML.1) as follows. Regard the    as having the 
status of moderated course scores yi0 say, corresponding to some fictitious 
course 0, so    (all i). Suppose the weight w0 is exceedingly large 
(for(LS.1)) or else    (for (ML.1)). Then from (LS'.3) we have 
   and similarly from (ML'.3),   .
  On the other hand, on comparing (5.3b) with (ML'.2) and (LS'.2) which
it parallels, we see that if it should happen that    for all i then
    .
  The equations (5.3) quite clearly take the approach that "abilities"
as represented by    determine the "achievements" as represented
by yij, whereas the other approaches regard the achievements   
as measuring the unobservable underlying abilitites   . In fact,
the most that is claimed by the designers of ASAT is that the observed measures
   are estimates of some general scholastic aptitude measure. While
attention has been given to relations like (ML'.2) and (LS'.2), with (5.3b)
emerging as a compromise (see Cooney (1975, 1978), Hasofer (1978), Hasofer
& Davis (1979)), it has been in the context of a bivariate selection model.
Our model and approaches are much closer to those of a multivariate model.

 6. Existence and Uniqueness  
These problems arise only in connection with the procedures of Sections
3 and 4. First, supposing    it follows that in (1.3) we can write
  (6.1)  
where for any real    and non-zero    we have    and    
so there is of necessity a considerable degree of non-uniqueness present. What 
we discuss here is the simplest case - and of practical relevance for a 
procedure currently implemented by Sydney University - where, in the 
situation Section 4, we suppose that the values of the paramaters    are fixed 
beforehand. Then the relevant estimation equations are given by (LS.1) and 
(LS.3). Equivalently, we need to determine the    from the system (4.5),
which, the    being known, can be rewritten as
  
where j=1,...,S. Thus by introducing the S x S matrices    and
   and the S x 1 vectors       where
    
    
where    is the Kronecker delta, (6.2) can be rewritten compactly
as 
    .  
Now the matrix B is stochastic, i.e., its elements are non-negative and its row
of sums are unity, so that the matrix I - B is singular.  If we assume (as is usually the case in practice) that it is irreducible (Seneta, 1981), this implies that there is a unique left eigenvector     satisfying
  
and it is then elementwise positive. This in turn implies that I - B is of rank S -1, and that u =    spans the subspace orthogonal to the subspace spanned by the columns of I - B. It is easily checked directly that in our case, u =    using (6.3), and    using (6.4), so    is in the space spanned by the columns of I - B, and hence (6.5) does have a solution, albeit non-unique. Now if    is any specified solution and    denotes any solution, it follows from (6.5) that
  .



