By R.W. O'Brien ABSTRACT  
Sound waves can be generated in a colloid by the application of an
alternating electric field. In this paper we describe the method for
calculating this and the related electro-acoustic phenomenon of electric
fields generated by sound waves. As an illustration of the procedure, we
obtain formulae for these two effects for a suspension of spherical particles
with thin double-layers, in a parallel plate geometry.

 1. INTRODUCTION  
The effects to be described in this paper arise from the presence of electric
charges on the surface of the suspended particles. In equilibrium such
particles are surrounded by a diffuse cloud of ions carrying a total charge
equal and opposite to that of the particle. This arrangement of surface
charge and diffuse charge is known as a "double-layer".
  When sound waves pass through a suspension, the density difference between
the particles and the liquids leads to relative motion between these two
phases. As a result macroscopic electric currents are set up and these lead
to electric fields which alternate at the sound wave frequency.
  The idea that sound waves could generate electric fields in a suspension
of charged particles arose in a paper by Debye (1933), in connection with
electrolyte solutions. In 1938 Hermans extended Debye's analysis to the
case of a suspension in which the particle radius is much smaller than the
double-layer thickness, a situation which occurs rarely in practice. In
1951 Enderby studied the more important case of a dilute suspension of
weakly-charged spheres in an electrolyte in which the ions have equal
diffusivities. This restriction on the electrolyte was removed in the following
year by Booth and Enderby (1952).
  Since that time there have been no theoretical developments in this area,
presumably because of the difficulties associated with measuring pressure
waves and electric fields in suspensions. Fortunately, these difficulties
have now been overcome, and a device has appeared on the market which is
capable of accurately measuring this effect in the Megahertz range. The device
is also capable of measuring the reverse effect of sound waves generated
by electric fields, an effect which has hitherto escaped notice in the
scientific literature.
  In this paper these two phenomena will be referred to as "electro-acoustic"
effects. The aim of the paper is to provide a theoretical basis for relating
both effects to the suspension microstructure.
  In the following section we set out the microscopic differential equations
which must be solved in the calculation of these effects. These equations
govern the distribution of ions, electrical potential, fluid velocity and
pressure in the suspension. In S3 we set out the macroscopic constitutive
equations required for the calculation of electro-acoustic effects and
we derive a reciprocal relation between two of the coeffecients in these
expressions. This relation provides a link between the electric field generated
by a sound wave, and the sound waves generated by an electric field.
  Formulae for these two effects are obtained in SS4 and 5 for the case
of a dilute suspension confined by two parallel plates. In S4, which is
concerned with electric fields generated by sound waves, we discuss Enderby's
work in more detail, pointing out a number of flaws in his solution of the
electrokinetic equations and in his subsequent calculation of the electric
field.
  The formulae derived in SS4 and 5 both involve the electrophoretic 
mobility of the particles in an alternating electric field. In S6 we 
calculate this mobility for particles with radii much greater than the 
double-layer thickness.

 2. THE ELECTROKINETIC EQUATIONS  
The calculation of colloidal transport properties involves the solution
of the "electrokinetic equations", equations which describe the microscopic
variations in the ion density, electrical potential, velocity and pressure
in the suspension. The derivation of these equations is described in a number
of papers (see for example O'Brien and White (1978), or Sherwood (1980)),
so only a brief outline will be given here.
  The electrical potential    satisfies Poissons equation
  
in the liquid. Here    is the permittivity of the electrolyte,   
is the charge and    the number density of the jth species of ion,
and N is the number of ionic species in the electrolyte. In the absence
of any chemical reactions each species satisfies the conservation equation
  
where    is the flux density of the jth ionic species. In a dilute
electrolyte
  
where    is the fluid velocity and    the ion diffusivity.
The terms on the righthand side represent the fluxes due to Brownian motion,
the local electric field, and convection with the flow respectively.
  The microscopic quantities of interest will presumable vary in the liquid
on a length scale of the order of the particle radius. On the assumption
that the wavelength of the sound wave is much greater than the particle
radius, we will treat the fluid as incompressible in the calculation of
these microscopic variations. Thus the equations of fluid motion take the
form
  
and 
    .  
As usual       and 1.c. are the fluid density, viscosity and
pressure respectively. The convective inertia term has been omitted on the
grounds that the particle Reynolds number is very small. The final term
on the right hand side represents the electrical body-force per unit volume.
  In a suspension in thermodynamic equilibrium, the ionic and fluid fluxes
are identically zero. From equation (2.3) it follows that the ion densities
are given by the Boltzmann expression.
    
for j=1, ....N, where the    are constants. Substitution of these
formulae in Poisson's equation yields a differential equation for the
equilibrium potential. From this equation it can be shown (Hunter, (1981),
Chp.2) that the potential decays to zero exponentially with distance from
an isolated particle, with a decay length    given by
    .  
This decay is associated with the presence of the diffuse cloud of counterions
referred to in the introduction.    is normally referred to as the
"double-layer thickness". Beyond the double-layer the potential is zero
and   .
  The form of the equilibrium potential and ion density fields around a
spherical particle depend on the relative ion densities beyond the
double-layer, on    the ratio of particle radius to double-layer
radius to double-layer thickness and on the potential at the particle surface
  . The latter quantity in turn depends on the nature of the particles
and on the type and density of the ions beyond the double-layer (Hunter,
(1981), Chp.2.2). In this paper    will be treated as a given quantity.
  We now turn to the case of a suspension disturbed from equilibrium by,
for example, the application of an alternating electric field. As in nearly
every other electrokinetic study it will be assumed here that the local
ion densities and electric fields are only slightly perturbed from their
equilibrium values. For convenience we take a frame of reference moving
with the particles. A superscript "o" will be used to denote the equilibrium
ion densitites and potential, and the departures from those equilibrium
values will be indicated by    prefix.
  Neglecting products of the various deviations from equilibrium in the
equations (2.1)-(2.3) and (2.5), we obtain the linear forms
  
and
                                                     
where an    time dependence has been assumed for each of the
perturbed quantities. The term involving the particle velocity   
arises from our choice of the particles as the frame of reference.
  Inside the particle, the velocity and ion densities are zero, and δ
   satisfies Laplaces equation, assuming fixed charge density within the particle.
At the particle surface, the boundary conditions are 
    
and  
where    is the unit outward normal and the square brackets denote the
jump at the particle surface.
  At large distances    from the particle
  
and  
where    and VP are the uniform electric field and pressure gradient
far from the particle. For the dilute suspension of interest here, it will
be shown that these quantities may be equated to the macroscopic electric
field and pressure gradient.
  The mathematical specification of the problem is completed by the
requirement that the nett external force on any particle and its double-layer
is zero. This follows from the fact that in equilibrium, the nett charge
on the particle and double-layer is zero. Since the nett external force
on this region is the charge times the field, we conclude that to O(E),
this force is zero.

 3. A USEFUL RECIPROCAL RELATION  
For the calculation of the electro-acoustic effects we will require formulae
for the particle velocity    and the volume average current density
   in the suspension, where the local current density   
is given by
    .  
Here    is the local free charge current density, due to the
ions and any fixed charges on the particles, and the second term includes
the contribution from the polarization charges (O'Brien, 1982, SIII).
  From the linearity of the equations (2.4) and (2.7) it follows that
   and    are related to VP and    by the
linear forms
    
and          
    
where the symbols    and K