<sample>
	<id> J23 </id>
	


	<note> 2001 words </note>
	


	<source> Power Play - Essays in the Sociology of Australian Sport </source>
	


	<h> Australia - this sporting life </h>
	


	<bl> By Jon Stratton </bl>
	

This chapter is a discussion of sport in the Australian context, that is to
say, it is concerned with the position that sport holds in what might be
called the Australian world-view. It is often argued by Marxist theoreticians
that there is no such thing as a socially based world-view. Such arguments
emphasise the importance of class-based ideologies as the loci for analysis.
Althusser, on whose ideas much recent Marxist cultural analysis has been
based, summed up his position like this:
  As a first formulation I shall say: all ideology hails or interpellates
  concrete individuals as concrete subjects, by the functioning of the category
  of the subject.
By this he meant that the individual is always already in ideology. S/he
can only think in and through ideology. At another point in the same essay
Althusser sums up his delineation of ideology by writing:
  It therefore appears that the subject acts insofar as he is acted by the
  following system (set out in the order of its real determination):
  ideology existing in a material ideological apparatus, prescribing material
  practices governed by a material ritual, which practices exist in the
  material actions of a subject acting in all conscience according to his
  belief.
Althusser is arguing, as he puts it, that ideology has a material existence.
Ideology, in other words, exists in practice, indeed practice is ideology.
In modern Marxist theory this formulation is opposed by the `cultural studies'
approach of writers such as Richard Hoggart, Raymond Williams and E.P.
Thompson. In his outline of the debate between these two positions Richard
Johnson has described the group of cultural studies writers' definition
of culture like this:
  Cultural studies inherits [the ways-of-life conception of culture] and
  expands it further so that it contains matters as heterogeneous as
  language-in-general, the specific output of the mass media, the literary
  text, the values implicit in forms of working class collective action, the 
  styles of sub-groups and the general political discourse.
As Johnson goes on to indicate there is a tendency on the one hand for the
Althusserian formulation of ideology to overgeneralise, taking in all actual
behaviour, whilst there is an equivalent tendency on the other hand for
the `cultural studies' formulation of `way of life' to assimilate the category
of ideology. Both these theoretical positions tend towards an elision of
the awareness of the specificity of cultural patterns. Idological themes,
even if manifested in material practices, may be manifested in different
practices in different socio-cultural orders. Reformulated from the `cultural
studies' position it can be suggested that a way of life may embody a variety
of values and beliefs but the `way of life' itself consists of certain 
behaviours and not others.
  A distinction needs to be drawn between the ideological theme and the
cultural materialisation of that theme. We need to recognise that there
are, here, two levels of analysis. First, there needs to be discussion
of the specific organisation of the cultural order. Second, there is the
more `micro' analysis (which the tools of semiotics can help us with) of
the ideological themes implicit in the meaning of cultural manifestations.
  We may well be able to discuss `middle-class ideology' as an aspect of
the production and reproduction of capitalism, but the specific, lived
formulation of that ideology is mediated through cultural concerns which
are specific to particular socio-cultural orders and sometimes to specific
groups within a socio-cultural order. Thus the articulation of ideological
themes such as egalitarianism or individualism occurs in the context of,
and is inflected by, broader cultural preoccupations which structure the
uniqueness of a particular socio-cultural entity. John Hargreaves has expressed
this well. He has written:
  ... culture is both constituted by people consciously making choices and
  evaluations of their experience AND simultaneously, because culture
  is also inherited from the choices and evaluations people have made in
  the past as tradition, it is also constitutive of choice and action, and
  therefore culture can also, though it never does entirely, act as a powerful
  constraint on understanding social life in appropriate terms and on taking
  appropriate forms of action.
Hargreaves' argument implies a randomness to the production of culture.
But the constitution of particular society's cultural order, the structure
of meaning which, from the point of view of the individual who lives it
we might term a world-view, is based on the negotiation of material conditions
and social formations which come together in specific historical conjunctures.
  Culture, like ideology, is an holistic concept. The difficulty which it
poses for Althusserian-influenced Marxism lies in its relation to the idea
of practice. Ideology may be conceived as being structurally articulated but
this is because ideology is conceptualised as thematic. Culture may be
understood as the material practice through which ideology is mediated and
manifested. As a consequence, the category of culture tends towards the
reintroduction of the human subject through the necessity of accounting
for the `random' signs which go to make up a society's cultural order. For
the lived subject culture is not organised randomly. It is the product of
ongoing historical, ideological and material determinations. It is also,
in a specific sense, a product of invention. For example, whilst cricket
at a specific historical moment might manifest a particular ideological
theme or themes, we need to recognise that criket itself was not inevitable
in other socio-cultural orders, while other games may manifest the same
ideological themes.
  This rather arid discussion needs to be taken further - but not here. It
would be possible to take sport in general, or indeed one particular sport
such as cricket, and explain the material and ideological conditions
surrounding its production in a specific socio-cultural order such as that
constituted by Australia. Equally, it would be possible to examine some
of the cultural myths surrounding sport, or particular sports, in, let
us say, Australian culture. In this Chapter I will do a little of each.
However, my main purpose is to bring both these analytical positions together
in order to discuss the circumstances which produced an image of sport as
an important aspect of Australia's structure of culture. The structure
of culture refers to those ideas which form an essential part of the matrix
(or framework) of the Australian socio-cultural order. What I want to argue
is that the last part of the nineteenth century was the crucial period in
the production of the Australian image of sport and its positioning in the
structure of culture. Throughout this article there will be an interweaving
of these two concerns.
  In the context of the deployment of an Australian structure of culture
one of the most important factors was the historical conjuncture which produced
a conception of the un-naturalness of the Australian environment. Bill Mandle
has already had something to say about this in the context of developing
attitudes towards sport in Australia. It is worth elaborating on his argument.
In his article Mandle notes how, in the latter half of the nineteenth century,
an anxiety about the quality of the Australian race developed from two sources.
The first, which is not of concern here, was the question of the extent
to which the convict origins of many Australians might provide the basis
for the development of a degenerate people. The second source lay in a
perception of the degenerating qualities of the Australian environment,
including its climate. Mandle notes that, as Australian cricket teams started
beating English teams during the 1870s:
  Almost overnight the mood changed from one of doubt and relief to one
  of confidence, and the part that cricket played in generating that confidence
  cannot be underestimated.
What we need to investigate here are, first, the changes which went on to
produce cricket as what late nineteenth-century society understood as a
sport (something I will return to later) and second, how cricket was being
used within the Australian structure of culture (specifically how and to
what extent it contributed to `national confidence'). In order to do this
we need to understand how sport was coming to be structured into the English
midlle-class's view of the world. Below I want to say more about the qualities,
such as manliness, attributed to sport. Here we need to consider briefly
how physical exercise came to provide the basis on which these qualities were
articulated.


	<h> Bodies and bourgeois values </h>
	
The late eighteenth century in England saw the rise of what is usually called
the Romantic movement. One aspect of this was a celebration of the environment,
of the natural world as being natural and, indeed, for being natural. In
more general, cultural terms the English nineteenth-century intellectual
middle-class had a certain revulsion against the growing industrialised
urbanism and found in nature a nostalgia for a lost pastoral past. The human
(male) body, an articulation of the natural, but carrying within it the mind -
the basis of civilisation - lay at the intersection of the urbanised (and
civilised) world. The deployment of the category of sport originated from
within the English public schools, most obviously as a part of Thomas Arnold's
reorganisation of Rugby which Simon has summed up like this:
  ... [Arnold] provided a form of education designed to fuse aristrocracy
  and bourgeoisie, to make the aristocracy more useful and the bourgeoisie
  more polished - one which corresponded exactly with, and in turn helped
  to form, the aspiration of the Victorian upper-middle class.
The practice of sport, in the form of institutionalised and delimited physical
activity, provided a training for the `natural' body and a discipline which
was a part of `civilising' the mind. The body became the site of a complex
resolution. On the one hand there was the attempt to eradicate nature in
the form of the `natural' child through the inculcation and internalisation
of bourgeois values. On the other hand, however, nature as a general concept
was valorised over the `unnatural' depredations of city life. In practice,
in the context of the child, this was represented in the celebration of exercise
as the way to health. These contradictory positions were reconciled through
the argument of `mens sana in corpore sano.' A new, natural bourgeois man
would be developed as the mind, full of bourgeois values, was harmonised
with the physical body of nature.
  The nineteenth-century arguments about such things as the violence of
football were carried out in precisely these terms. Dunning and Sheard note,
for example, in relation to the debate over the acceptability, or not, of
hacking - a debate which played a large part in the formation of the Rugby
Football Union - that:
  ... Rugby supporters were the most persistent advocates of a rougher and,
  as they saw it, more `manly' game. However, a growing body of opinion, inside
  as well as outside Rugby circles, regarded practices such as `hacking' as
  barbaric.
The young middle-class male's body became the site for a set of arguments
which amounted to a debate about what the synthesis between nature and
bourgeois values was to be and how it was to be articulated in practice.
  With this background we can now appreciate how much importance the
Anglo-Australian middle class would have placed on sport. In England sport
mediated and reconciled the natural and the civilised. The natural, however,
was implicitly associated with the British (and European) environment. As
Richard White notes:
  Such attitudes raised intriguing questions about the development of new
  types from British stock. When transplanted to other parts of the world,
  did the Anglo-Saxon racial type continue to progress, or did it degenerate?
In Australia this question was asked against a backdrop of the perceived
`enervating nature of our climate' and the experienced alienness of the
environment in which, for example, Flinders abandoned his attempt to use the
Linnean system of classification, whilst the Reverend Sydney Smith simply
thought that here nature `seems determined to have a bit of play'. In Australia,
then, sport did not mediate and reconcile the lived-in nature with civilisation
but rather provided a bulwark, a protection against this new, un-natural
environment. 


</sample>
