By Stewart Clegg Introduction  
The world of scholarship constitutes many facts which are "inconvenient"
for deeply held values as Max Weber (1948,p.147) remarked in "Science as
a vocation". Some disciplines may well imagine they manage this tension
by ignoring it, opting for either the empiricism of facts or the canonical
role of Tradition. Some practitioners of sociology clearly share one or
other of these phantasies (which, in fact, always reduce to the latter).
I should say at the outset that I cannot imagine the luxury of such views,
any more than could Weber.

  As is well known, Weber never anticipated that, whatever the probability
of its achievement, the value of "socialism" could ever be an antithesis
to the fact of bureaucracy. Despite his opinion and through his legacy,
in recent years a number of scholars in the field of sociology have been
involved in the development of what have come to be called "critical"
perspectives on organizations. The critical challenge has been to empiricist
and conservative conceptions of the field. Instead of simply reporting evident
"facts", these critical scholars have increasingly turned to a study of
the structures and processes taken to underly the existence and non-existence
of certain possible facts, in enquiry whose method is somewhat similar to
Umberto Eco's (1983) puzzle-solving method of "abduction". Sometimes, however,
puzzles may be solved too readily, evidence found too close at hand or
"inconvenient" facts avoided.

 Critical sociology, socialism and organizations  
Critical sociology of organizations has been critical of the practice
of orthodox organization theory in its central concerns. These have been
with the design and rational structuring of organizations (Donaldson 1985;
Benson 1983). Characteristically, drawing on marxist perspectives, "rational
structuring" in organization has been critiqued as an effect of capitalist
domination. Autonomy, posed as a laudable goal, has been seen as emancipation
from that which dominates. It has frequently been argued that, in practical
terms, this requires somehow overthrowing "capitalism"; theoretically it
requires overcoming the limits to an imagination held captive by a knowledge
whose constitutive interest is in the "control" of objects (Habermas 1971).
This argument is not unproblematic. In rejecting the concern with "rational
structuring" as itself a delusion of "capitalist theoretical hegemony",
little space is left in which critics might rationally re-construct
organizations in practice.
  Critical organization theory, then, in spite of its real achievements,
has not yet contributed to a generalizable alternative practice of
organizations. Some justification exists for this negativity. An essential
objective of the critical exercise is to alert us to the unexamined and
implicit assumptions of existing frameworks. It was in this way that a certain
eminent victorian left-hegelian, for whom "critique" was rarely absent from
the title page, developed his own analyses. However, Karl Marx, in a famous
thesis, advises us against merely negative dialectics; indeed, a warning
against analysis without transformative application is engraved upon his
tombstone. This should alert us to a second meaning of "critical", as being
decisive with respect to outcomes, in which some positive alternative does
require proposal.
  A major reason for the shortcomings of marxist critical theory in
organization analysis is that its critique is far too narrow. Its deficiency
in this respect has two aspects, both relating to Marx's lineage from utopian
socialist thought. On the one hand, classical marxism and its derivations
have been subjected to a critique both by utopianism and for utopianism,
as Anderson (1983,p.97) has noted. With respect to contemporary marxism,
utopian critics most frequently focused on its narrow and utilitarian
development in Eastern Europe after 1917 (although in a modified form the
same change surfaces in accusations against the reformism of social democracy),
while Western Marxism, since Lenin, with its characteristic concern with
aesthetic and cultural products rather than the social relations of more
material and mundane production, may similarly be characterized by default
as "utopian". The cleft stick of marxism's development is, of course,
explicable. Classical marxism, as it developed around the twin vectors
emerging out of the revisionism debates in the Second International, lost
the practical utopianism associated with the thrust of Luxemburg's,
Pannekoek's and Gorter's commitment to "council communism" (see Bricaner
1978; Smart 1978; Carchedi 1985). Only in Gramsci's involvement with the
Turin workers council movement of 1921 did it retain a momentary flicker,
one which, in his Prison Notebooks, remained unquelled even while imprisoned
by Fascism (Gramsci 1971). On the one hand, so it seemed, social democracy,
Bernstein's heir, developed a narrow, utilitarian form of political calculation
premised on an accommodation and management of capitalism. On the other
hand, Bolshevikism simply incorporated the crudest aspects of capitalist
organizational practice in Lenin's enthusiasm for Taylorism and its subsequent
degradation into Stakhonovitism.

  Faced with this situation, some of the generation who were learning their
sociology and their politics in `68, not surprisingly, attempted to return
to Marx to find some way out of the conjuncture of a stallled de-stalinization
in the East and an aborting "long boom" in the West. However, Marx was of
little help. In the few remarks in his work on the organization of a socialist
society the residues of an impractical utopianism were all too apparent
traces. Themes chacteristic of French utopian socialists such as St Simon
or Fourier, which imagined overthrow of complexity and divisions of
labour, were reproduced therein. As Perry Anderson (1983,p98) has remarked "The
conviction of an inherent simplification of administration and production,
economy and polity alike, found its most passionate expression in the pages
of (Lenin's) State and Revolution where any cook could run the state". And
despite a renewal of interest in "self management" and "workers control"
as solutions to the increasing failure of capitalist enterprises such as
the Lip watch factory in France and the Triumph motor works in England,
Gramsci's (1971) cryptic notes on "workers councils" remained primarily
an academic concern.

  In the East, "socialist construction" under Bolshevik tutelage, where
it addressed questions of organization at all, proffered solutions learnt
from the most ruthless of capitalists such as Henry Ford but applied them
with an even more effective regime of terror than Ford's Pinkerton Agents.
In the West, more orthodox marxists could ignore organizational questions
as they waited for capitalism to collapse. It was only Bernstein, and the
real heirs of the German SDP, the Swedish Social Democrats, who linked
"socialist construction" and organizational issues in any effective way.

  It is worth recalling here why Bernstein in particular took upon himself
the odium of challenging "orthodox marxism" in the international marxist
movement, for we would argue that present-day marxist theorists may be
caught in the same intellectual bind and political limbo as the old orthodoxy
(even if they have done more than their forbears to raise their predicament
to the level of an art form!). Working from deterministic theses about
inevitable class polarization and crisis under capitalism, the orthodoxy
announced three "guarantees" of history - capitalism's self-destruction,
the working classes coming demographic dominance, and, given continued
agitation and propaganda, socialist political dominance on that demographic
basis (Salvadori 1979). For the orthodox, be it noted, it was capitalism's
macro economic irrationality that would precipitate the terminal "crisis"
of mature capitalism: at the point of production the bourgeoisie ran a tight
ship whose presumed technical sophistication and organizational efficiency
would fall like ripe fruit into socialist laps.

  In hindsight, this last point was an astonishing and self-defeating
concession, one that denied the necessity to mount a practical challenge
to capitalist organization of the enterprise and thus develop "the material
conditions" for the resolution of the contradiction between forces and
relations of production. For western labour movements this concession has
left the bitter and enduring legacy of defencelessness against
economic-liberal policy, with which it shares the implicit assumption that
capitalist organization spells effective enterprise (Higgins 1985a; 1985b).
Secure in the belief that the final, cataclysmic crisis of capitalism was
only just around the corner, "orthodox marxism" went even further to argue
against any form of intervention in aid of progressive public policy or
of political alliances to support it. In each of these spheres its fatalistic
vision led inexorably to the politics of abstention.

  Bernstein demolished the "guarantees of history" to make way for a new
interventionist socialist politics. His classic Evolutionary Socialism,
though concerned mainly with an argument about social democracy's wider
political role, contains suggestive obiter dicta on organizational questions.
Having defined socialism as a movement towards - or the state of - an order
of society based on the principle of association (Bernstein 1961, p.96;
my emphasis), he has this principle depend on democratic organizational
forms: "Trade unions are the democratic element in industry. Their tendency
is to break down the absolutism of capitalism, and to procure for the worker
a direct influence in the management of industry" (pp. 139, 163).

  But Bernstein stopped halfway. His attack on determinism did not extend
to upsetting the orthodox assumption that capitalism had still to mature
- that is, still had a progressive future - before it would be meaningful
to propose transformative (as opposed to ameliorative) policies. Pending
this mystical maturation reformist interventions such as social policy
or industrial democracy rested on a merely ethical-liberal basis. In other
words, Bernstein stopped short of a critique of capitalism's organizational
effectiveness and, thus, could not forge the link between democratization
and economic renewal.

  This is precisely the link that Ernst Wigforss, Swedish social democracy's
formative theoretician, latched onto in the 1920s. Armed with Marx's
conceptualisation of capitalism's "irrationality", Wigforss imbibed the
lessons of the then ongoing "rationalisation movement" which uncovered -
albeit sympathetically - the organizational roots of industrial dislocation
and inefficiency in the capitalist enterprise. Two of the themes which the
movement articulated drew Wigforss' attention. First, forms of financial
calculation in the enterprise conflicted with the technical and organizational
preconditions of an efficient manufacturing process. Second, typical authority
relations and reward systems tended to produce inefficient work practices.
Wigforss concluded that these disorders were systemically induced, flowing
inescapably from two aspects of private ownership of industry - the profit 
principle and the necessarily authoritarian forms in which the outside owners'
interests and prerogatives were imposed on a working collectivity. Here, then,
was a whole new dimension of "critique" in addition to the critique of 
capitalism's macro-economic irrationality.

  Where Bernstein had talked about "organized capitalism", Wigforss (later
joined by a close colleague, Gunnar Myrdal) repeatedly took up the cudgels
against capitalist "disorganization" (especially Myrdal 1934). For Wigforss,
these considerations completely reversed social democracy's programmatic
presuppositions. Capitalism had no progressive future and socialists had
no business tinkering with ameliorative reforms while awaiting the great
day of maturation (or "crisis") and leaving capital in control of the
enterprise and resource allocation. The former had now to be democratized
and the latter brought under social control. Socialism, in his celebrated
phrase, had to be brought forward as "the working hypothesis" of day to
day policy-making. Transformational reforms had to go on the immediate
agenda.

  In arguing for industrial democracy (and later, economic democracy through
collectivized ownership of capital), Wigforss thus brought together the
issues of organizational effectiveness and control. Moreover, he broke with
the merely reproductive reformism of social democratic revisionism. "It
is a curious blindness" he wrote, "not to see that the organization of
economic life is at the same time a question of forms of control" (Wigforss
1981, Vol. IX,p.63). In a parallel development in the twenties, leading
elements of the Swedish union movement, who also had one foot in the
rationalization movement, began to develop a union "production policy" (de
Geer 1978; Hadenius 1976). They saw union participation in industrial
organization as necessary to overcome elements of capitalist disorganization
in industry if the latter was to meet union aspirations for employment and
wage levels. Both these developments came down to this: capitalism constituted
a deteriorating basis for the organization of the modern industry it itself
had created. The labour movement presented itself not simply as a challenger
to capital's control of the economy and enterprise, but more particularly
as the bearer of sounder organizational principles and social priorities
upon which to place a more advanced economy and enterprise.

