By Callen, Gallois, Noller CHAPTER 8 ANGER AND AGGRESSION  

While anger and aggression are used in everyday conversation as though they
mean the same thing, there is a clear distinction between the two. Anger
is a  basic emotion. Aggression, on the other hand, is a pattern of behaviour
which may or may not occur at the same time or following anger (Singer,
1982).
  Being angry is usually accompanied by universally recognizable facial
expressions (Ekman, 1980; Ekman, Friesen & Ancoli, 1980), and also by muscular
and physiological responses. The fact that a person is displaying the facial
expression of anger, however, does not necessarily mean that he or she is
angry. They may be pretending to be angry in order to have a particular
effect on others, such as getting something they want. In addition, while
anger is often aroused by extreme, persistent frustration or a failure to
cope, this anger does not necessarily lead to aggressive behaviour.

  The fact that anger and aggression do coexist in many situations does
  not mean that, like Laurel and Hardy, the presence of one automatically
  includes the other (Tavris, 1982, p.35).

As Tavris points out, it is possible to feel angry but to express anger
in nonaggressive ways. On the other hand, a professional assassin may behave
extremely aggressively for payment, without feeling anger toward the target.
As the term `murder in cold blood' implies, extreme aggression can occur
in the absence of the `heat' of anger.
  Aggressive behaviour can be classified in a number of different ways. Singer
(1982) distinguishes between direct aggression, such as violence or threats
of violence or assault, and indirect aggression, which involves insulting
words, telling someone you wish harm would come to them, slandering someone,
and the more passive aggression behaviours of lying and deception. Other
writers (Feshbach, 1964; Rule & Nesdale, 1976) distinguish between hostile
aggressive behaviour and instrumental aggression. The primary aim of hostile
aggressive behaviour is to inflict injury or harm on another person, and
it is generally accompanied by anger. Instrumental aggression is aggressive
behaviour which has as its aim some nonaggressive goal. The goal may be
personal, such as making money, achieving status or fulfilling an ambition.
In addition, the goal may be social, such as stopping the Vietnam war, banning
the bomb, prohibiting nuclear ships from entering Australian ports, or saving
rainforests or baby seals. Often during television news broadcasts, we see
people engaging in very aggressive behaviours in the pursuit of prosocial
and nonaggressive goals.

 Methods of studying aggression  

Aggression is studied mostly in laboratory studies, and occasionally in
field studies. In laboratory studies, a confederate of the experimenter
may provoke the subjects in some way in order to elicit an aggressive response.
A confederate may unfairly accuse subjects of cheating (e.g., Zillman &
Cantor, 1976), or insult subjects without any justification (Rule & Percival,
1971). A variety of aggressive responses have been studied including punching
(Kelley & Hake, 1970), administering a loud noise (Mann, Newton & Innes,
1982), or administering an electric shock (Milgram, 1963). Aggressive responses
may be made to an actual person present in the same room, to a person who
can be seen in another room, to a person who cannot be seen or even  to an 
inanimate object.
  In one field study (Goldstein and Arms, 1971), researchers measured the
aggression of male spectators before and after watching a football game.
Their levels of aggression were compared with male spectators interviewed
before and after witnessing a non-aggressive sport (a gymnastics competition).
Results indicated that hostility increaed significantly after watching
the football game, but there was no increase in hostility for spectators
of the gymnastics meet.

 Determinants of aggression  

Theories about the determinants of aggression and aggressive behaviour fall
into three main categories: biological/genetic theories, frustration theories,
and social learning theories.

 Biological/genetic theories  

Both Freud and Darwin saw aggression as an inevitable part of human nature,
a consequence of basic innate drives. Each emphasised different aspects
of the aggressive drive. Freud focused on the negative aspects of aggression
- violence, danger and destructiveness. Darwin concentrated on the evolutionary
(and to some extent positive) aspects of aggression - its self defence and
adaptive functions. In general, it appears that there are times when
aggression is adaptive, and times when it is destructive. The situation
in which the aggression occurs and the function of the aggressive behaviour
are crucial.
  Freud described the person as having two basic drives: eros or the drive
to love, and thanatos or the drive to death and destruction (see Chapter
2). The latter drive accounts for aggressive behaviour. According to Freud,
people have an innate tendency to behave aggressively in every situation,
and people are constantly in conflict and at the mercy of these warring
instincts. As Tavris (1982) comments:
  Yet in the dark Freudian schema, so much unconscious rage and aggression!
  Everyone, at every age, is unwittingly furious with everyone else. Infants,
  for maternal abandonment. Toddlers, with the same-sexed parent who forbids
  incestuous lusts. Adolescents, for having to grow up and forgo childhood
  pleasures. Adults for having to work and repress their instinctive passions
  (pp. 37).
Freud's picture of the libido or energy system was a hydraulic one, with
a finite amount of energy moving around within the system. When there is
any blocking of this energy because aggressive drives are not discharged,
then the energy must find release or the level will reach a critical point,
and highly aggressive behaviour will result.
  Lorenz (1966, 1974) also proposed a hydraulic model of anger and aggression.
For Lorenz, aggression has an instinctual basis, and aggressive energy
accumulates if it is not discharged. Overt aggressive behaviour occurs when
there is a  build-up of aggressive energy - rather like steam from a kettle.
Lorenz acknowledged that aggressive behaviour in humans usually involves
both this build-up of aggressive energy and some appropriate cue for eliciting
aggressive behaviour, such as the presence of an enemy. Like Darwin, he
emphasised the evolutionary survival value of the aggressive instinct.
Nonetheless, he noted some clear differences between humans and animals
in the way the instinctual drive is expressed. First, animals have natural
inhibitions against killing their own species, but humans do not seem to.
Second, human ingenuity has created numerous ways of inflicting injury on
another person. Many of these methods, such as bombs and explosives, tend
to distance the aggressor from the targets of aggression, and make it easier
for humans to aggress against one another. Third, Lorenz believed that human
society allowed for insufficient discharge of the inevitable build-up of
aggression. As a consequence, people are forced to suppress their anger,
with sometimes dangerous results. He argued that people allowed to engage
in minor aggressive episodes would be less likely to be involved in major
acts of aggression (more on this later).
  Lorenz's view can be criticised on at least two counts. In the first place,
there is no clear experimental evidence for the claims he makes about
aggression in humans. In the second place, he seems to have ignored the
tremendous amount of variation in aggression that occurs between cultures
and sub-cultural groups. Some cultures seem to indulge in frequent displays
of aggression, while other cultures allow little fighting and aggression.
Moreover, there is a great deal of variation within a culture, with some
people frequently behaving aggressively, and others rarely or never acting
aggressively. Instinctual theories cannot easily account for such between-group
and within-group differences. 
  Some researchers have tried to explain within-group differences by looking for
chromosomal abnormalities in highly aggressive people like convicted criminals.
In fact, some studies have found males with an extra Y chromosome (XYY instead
of XY) overrepresented in prison populations (Jarvik, Klodin & Matsuyama,
1973). In a Copenhagen study, Witkin and his colleagues (1976) studied 4,000
men to examine further this chromosomal effect. Only 16 men had the extra
Y chromosome, while the rest had the normal XY pattern. Seven of the 16
(or 42 per cent) had been convicted of a crime, while fewer than ten per
cent of the other group had been convicted of a crime. Yet men with the
extra Y chromosome were not more likely to have committed crimes of violence
than normals. Thus, it seems unlikely that the extra Y chromosome is an
explanation for violent behaviour. More probably, XYY men are overrepresented
in the prison population because their low levels of intelligence mean that
they are more likely to get caught (Baron, 1977).
  Electrical stimulation of certain parts of the nonhuman brain had elicited
aggressive responses. For example, Delgado (1967) isolated the involvement
of the hypothalamus in aggressive behaviour. While electrical stimulation
seems to lead to the emotional state of anger, the way anger is expressed
depends on social and environmental factors. For example, the monkeys in
Delgado's studies, even under the effects of electrical stimulation of the
hypothalamus, did not behave aggressively towards animals who were higher
in the dominance hierarchy. Such cultural and environmental influences on
aggressive behaviour are discussed further in a later section.

 Frustration and aggression  
Dollard and his colleagues (1939) proposed that frustration (interference
with a person's goal-directed behaviour) is the primary determinant of
aggression. Early versions of the theory claimed that frustration always
leads to aggression, and that aggression is always a product of some kind
of frustration. Aggression, of course, can be disguised, delayed or displaced
onto some less threatening or dangerous target, provided that the target
has some similarity to the original target. Miller (1941), a close colleague
of Dollard, modified the theory by maintaining that frustration has the
potential to produce a number of responses, one of which is aggression,
although he still saw aggression as the natural or most likely response
to frustration.
  From studies with animals, Miller (1948) enumerated a list of principles
which predict the displacement of aggression onto targets other than the
source of the frustration. He found that 
1. aggression is more likely to be displaced onto a target which is similar
   to the original target;
2. aggression is more likely to be displaced onto a target where there are
   fewer inhibitions against attacking that target (for example, a lower status
   target);
3. aggression if more likely to be displaced onto another target when the
   aggressive drive was very strong in the original situation, and it was
   inappropriate for the aggression to be directed at the original target (for
   example, I might lose my job if I do).
Figure 8.1 depicts a common sequence involving the displacement of aggressive
behaviour.
  In his study of aggression, Berkowitz (1962) has emphasised the role
of anger in the connection between frustration and aggression. He maintained
that frustration leads to anger which, in turn, serves as a drive increasing
the likelihood of aggressive behaviour. Whether aggressive behaviour occurs
or not depends on the presence of environmental cues such as weapons, or factors
likely to disinhibit aggressive behaviour such as violent films or alcohol.
Both of these factors will be discussed further in a later section.
  In one test of the frustration-aggression hypothesis (Kelley & Hake, 1970),
subjects were allowed to choose between an aggressive response (punching)
and a nonaggressive response (button-pressing). They preferred the aggressive
response following frustration, although they had preferred the non-aggressive
option in earlier trials where they were not subjected to frustration. Thus, 
the more frustrated subjects are, the more aggressive they are likely to be. 
Rule and Percival (1971) found that subjects were more aggressive to partners
(delivered stronger electric shocks to them) following either frustration
or an unjustified insult. While frustration can lead to aggression, it is
not the only prerequisite to aggressive behaviour.

 Social learning and aggression  
Bandura (1976) has argued that people learn to be aggressive either by
observing models who are aggressive or by being rewarded or reinforced for
aggressive behaviour.
Exposure to aggressive models: As a test of model effects, Bandura, Ross
and Ross (1961) exposed children to two types of models. First, an adult
behaved very aggressively towards a bobo doll (a large blow-up doll weighted
in the bottom so that it bounces back when hit).  
            
  

