Defining literacy: common myths and alternative readings  

  

This paper is concerned with crucial issues which need to be addressed in
attempting to define literacy.  Several persistent myths or common misreadings
of the nature of literacy are critiqued, namely the myths of literacy as:
an absolute, word perfect standard; a collection of functional skills; an
autonomous, context-free and unified competence; and a means of economic
benefit.  Alternative definitions, differing radically from the myths in
their reading of reality, are proposed.  These argue for a broad, inclusive
definition which takes into account two broad perspectives - (i) the
essentially creative meaning-centred and relative nature of language learning
or use, and (ii) the patterns of social and cultural contexts in which literate
behaviours are learnt, developed, constrained by or act to constrain the
literacy of others.  A dual focus is argued for.  First, a focus on individual
learning and experience serves to highlight the essentially constructive,
selective, purposeful nature of the literacy process and the organic relation
beteen literacy, experience, personal growth and autonomy.  Thus, liteacy
is seen as transcending exclusively linguistic considerations and empowering
its possessors to make sense of, to read and reread their experience, both
to "take meanings" from the world and to act to transform that world.  The
second essential focus entails the recognition that socio-cultural contexts,
including the nature, availability or distribution of information and printed
materials in a society, are a vital part of the literacy process itself,
shaping the meaning, values status and conceptions of literacy practices
or competences.  Hence discussion moves to the wider definitional framework
for the analysis of literacies as social practices embedded in socio-cultural
contexts of parent-child relationships, socialization patterns and ideologies.

"I don't know what you mean by `glory,'" Alice said. Humpty Dumpty smiled
contemptuously. "Of course you don't - till I tell you ..."
"When I use a word," Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, "it means
just what I choose it to mean - neither more nor less".
"The question is," said Alice, "whether you can make words mean so many
different things".
"The question is," said Humpty Dumpty, "which is to be master - that's all".
 (Lewis Carroll, 1985:173)  

Substitute the word `literacy' for `glory', and we have an apt account of
the idiosyncratic and variously motivated definitions or uses of the concept
of `literacy'.  The attempt to define literacy is problematic.  Varying
definitions abound, both in theory and practice.  Some emphasize the
acquisition of basic communication skills or a level of competency required
for effective functioning in a given society, some other definitions - such
as "organic literacy" (Carozzi, 1974) - focus upon literacy as a process
"at the heart of the growth of a person", and again others encompass
sociological and political perspectives as central (Street, 1984; Levine,
1986).  A further, common approach has been to ignore problems of definition
altogether.  Large scale surveys of literacy levels, such as in Australia
in 1975, and the USA in 1986, and various media debates regarding literacy
standards often assume that what it means to be literate in our society
is clear cut, self-evident, uncontroversial and readily measurable.

However, the difficulties of suggesting a simple but acceptable formulation
of literacy are conveyed by Levine's (1986:22) metaphor of an indigestible
cake

     .... what might appear to be an endless series of disagreements and
     controversies will be encountered which reflect the fact that we are
     dealing with a complex amalgam of psychological, linguistic and social
     processes layered one on top of another like a rich and indigestible
     gateau.  Different varieties of academic specialists cut slices out
     of this cake with the conceptual equipment their disciplinary training
     has taught them to favour.  Consumers of the cake (teachers, pupils,
     politicians, employers) have very different appetites and push and
     jostle each other to secure a wedge of a particular size and, if possible,
     try to get their preferred wedge defined as the standard helping for
     everybody else.

The questions of `what is literacy?' and `what is literacy for?' are
fundamental to the responsible and effective work of language teachers,
educators, policy and curriculum designers, researchers and academics. 
Otherwise we are working in the dark, unaware of what informs and constrains
literacy policy, practice and evaluation at all levels, and complacent about
or blind to the rival conceptions represented by traditional mainstream
and minority literacy practices in the community.  Yet characteristically
there has been academic neglect of these issues (Levine, 1986:3-6), or
discipline-bound discussion, public confusion and misreading of the problems
of literacy and illiteracy, and eclectic uninformed approaches applied in
schools.  The back-to-basics or know-nothing movement (as Goodman (1982)
dubs it), the application of business or systems management, or cost benefit
analyses to the school curriculum, the nationwide surveys of literacy levels
of performance in schools and/or the community conducted in USA, UK and
Australia, the media preoccupation with headlines - "1 million adult
illiterates in Australia", and the recent Victorian Ministerial initiatives
to introduce assessment of literacy levels in state primary schools - all
represent inadequate definitions of literacy and its uses.  As well, they
can be seen as evidence for Spencer's (1986:442) claim that
     Concern about literacy and the competences of learners is strongest
     when the sociocultural functions of written language in a community
     are changing.  That this is the case at present is another commonplace.

A starting point for defining literacy is to clear the ground of tenacious,
common literacy myths which have contributed to the notion of "the standard
helping for everybody else".  In particular, the persistence of these myths
has closed off enquiry into two deeper issues: (i) the analysis of the
socio-cultural practices in which all literacy learning is embedded, assigned
value and becomes sociologically determining and constraining, and (ii)
the analysis of the changing social functions of printed material in an
increasingly technological society, which includes the emergence of other
literacies of the future which are already gaining ground on the traditional
mainstream literacy of the school.

 COMMON MYTHS AND ALTERNATIVE READINGS  
Five common myths are discussed below and critiqued in turn by the posing
of alternative readings of reality.  The myths have in common the conception
of literacy as essentially technical, linguistic or skills based, instrumental,
neutral and autonomous.  Some of their appeal comes from their ability to
enlist literacy to serve other causes, while sidestepping close analysis
of the nature of literacy and direction of social change.  The counter readings
argue for a broader understanding of literacy that is more inclusive of
learner purposes and experiences and more aware of prevailing social, cultural
and political realities.  These readings share the belief that language
is inescapably social and that, therefore, a theory of language learning
presupposes a social theory which goes beyond socio-linguistic considerations.

It may be useful to quote here three shorthand definitions of literacy argued
for in the literature which are consistent with the alternative readings
I am proposing.

     By literacy I mean the ability to make and comprehend meanings in reading
     and writing in a particular context, for particular purposes, with
     respect to particular texts.   (Boomer, 1983:2)  

     I shall use the term `literacy' as a shorthand for the social practices
     and conceptions of reading and writing.   (Street, 1984:1) 

     .... a general definition of literacy as the exercised capacity to
     acquire and exchange information via the written word.  Functional
     literacy can be [re]defined as the possession of, or access to, the
     competences and information requried to accomplish transactions entailing
     reading and writing which an individual wishes - or is compelled -
     to engage.   (Levine, 1986:43) 

Myth 1: that literacy is the ability to read, write and spell correctly
(the myth of literacy as an absolute or perfectable product).
This myth defines reading and writing as word exact processes, and hence
focusses upon the mastery of correct forms and the eradication of errors.
Phonics and skills-centred approaches to language instruction rely heavily
on this definition, fragmenting, structuring and sequencing language learning
accordingly.

Indeed such systematic approaches to language instruction seem part of the
attraction: exponents can put their trust in ordered, manageable prepackaged
lessons, defer to marketed instructional programs and reading schemes, test
for mastery or remediation, and prescribe additional practice appropriate
to the master plan.  Moreover a line of common sense reasoning bolsters
the myth - that those who can use the language correctly are literate, and
that Standard English usage provides access to power denied to the less
educated.  Simple solutions have their appeal, thrusting aside disturbing
questions about the nature and purposes of literacy, the life-chances of
different social groups and the alarming pace and complexity of social and
technological change.  They also have their ideological base.

The existence of fixed levels of competence and a word perfect standard
is presumed, separating the literate from the `illiterate' or `sub-literate'.
Many parents and adult literacy students rigidly adhere to such debilitating
literacy myths, as Phillip (Grant, 1985) for instance admits after ten years
in an adult literacy program.

     I can read and write a bit now, but I think you tell yourself you can't
     all the time, and you brainwash yourself .. branded meself as being
     slow or dumb ... But with me I've gotta be right or not at all ...
     If I'm not gunna be right I won't write at all .... because I don't
     want to make a fool of meself.

Despite significant progress made in the tuition program many literacy
students, like Phillip, continue to see themselves as `illiterate' and to
insist on unrealistic notions of literacy as an exact, word perfect standard
in reading, writing and spelling (Grant, 1985; Pollock, 1983). They often
draw stark, absolute contrasts of literacy as for the `literates', `being
right' all the time, otherwise one is stigmatized as `illiterate', `bad'
and `wrong'.

While the myth exacerbates social stigma and low status, the product approaches
it promotes in schools are damaging in other ways.  They are reductive of
language as a meaning-making process, and of the child as a learner; to
read becomes recognizing words or decoding correctly, to learn a second
language becomes translating accurately, and to write becomes expressing
and spelling conventionally.  Programs, techniques and systems-oriented
approaches cast the learner in a passive role of recipient dependent on
the `reading expert' or instructional program.  Literacy purposes are likely
to be limited to information processing - the one way transmission or
extraction of supposedly unambiguous information.  It is assumed that a
single, objective meaning resides in the text and that the reader's
`comprehension' of it will be either right or wrong.  This continues despite
all the counter evidence that variation is

     the norm rather than the exception ... no concept has been more difficult
     for the [teaching] profession to abandon than this notion of language
     as a perfectable absolute.   (Harste, Woodward and Burke, 1984:104). 

Thus individual variations in response, comprehension and interpretation
of meaning are discouraged as divergent. 

Alternative reading 1: literacy is a creative, selective, meaning-centred
process, and a relative concept, relative to different texts, social contexts
and purposes.
In reality, being literate entails far more than reading, writing and spelling
correctly.  Reading and writing - the recognized core of literacy - are
creative, actively predictive and selective not exact processes.  Hence
achieving fluency depends upon taking risks in anticipating and constructing
meaning and varies according to context, purpose and text (e.g. Smith,
1978:1983).  Being literate is a relative concept, and not the attainment
of a particular level of mastery.  Accordingly, we are each more or less
literate in different settings, for example we may be literate in respect
to reading a literary text for pleasure, but not literate in respect to
reading a physics textbook or the installation instructions in a home appliance
manual poorly translated from Japanese.

Moreover, the reader's active construction of meaning is a tentative and
cumulative process.  Meaning is not transmitted absolutely from text to
reader, but is itself relative.  It is relative to: the implied questions,
purposes, ways of making sense of and taking sense from the world the reader
brings; the context and nature of particular reading tasks; as well as to
the demands and nature of the texts (Grant, in press).  
                                          
