Prospects for the Australian economy 1986-87By Dr Barry Gray Overview  

A mixed picture of economic performance is expected to unfold in the coming
financial year. Assuming no further sharp depreciation of the Australian
dollar, inflation should continue to decelerate throughout the course of
the year, under the influence of lower petrol prices and weaker growth in
import prices, to reach a level of 6.5 per cent in the first half of 1987.
Aggregate economic activity, which is estimated to have contracted in the
first half of 1986 and is expected to grow only slowly in the second half
of the year, should resume a more rapid growth rate in early 1987; in
year-average terms, nevertheless, non-farm GDP growth is forecast to fall
to half that expected to be achieved in the current year. Seasonally adjusted
unemployment rates are also expected to rise in coming months to levels
of about 8.7 per cent of the workforce but should then decline to 8.3 per
cent in early 1987. Finally, on the side of optimism, is the likelihood
of some further falls in the level of interest rates in coming months,
resulting from the recent declines in international rates brought about
by downward revisions to inflationary expectations in the wake of the collapse
of crude oil prices.

What, then, of the pessimistic side of the picture? Inflation, though
improving, will remain at rates double those of the major OECD countries,
leading to a substantial erosion of the earlier depreciation-induced
improvement in competitiveness. Further, the underlying rate of inflation
- exclusive of health care charges and the depreciation impact - is likely
to exhibit little variation from 1984-85 to 1986-87. Moreover, accelerating
labour cost growth during 1986-87 might limit the extent of any further
improvement in inflation beyond the end of the coming financial year. And,
unemployment remains at unacceptably high levels. But overriding all else
is the prospect of only a limited improvement in the balance of payments
in the coming year with the current account deficit remaining about $12
billion, equivalent to more than 4.5 per cent of nominal GDP. In order to
attract the required capital inflow and to avoid the impact of another strong
depreciation of the $A on inflation and debt repayments, the present downward
trend in interest rates is likely to be reversed later in 1986. This prospect,
together with the possibility of continued contractionary fiscal policies,
is thus likely to limit the extent of the anticipated recovery of early
1987, throwing the growth prospects of 1987-88 into considerable doubt.

The strong growth in employment and production of recent years has been
achieved at the cost of increased overseas debt and a continued rise in
external debt as a means of supporting increased employment cannot be
sustained. The constraints on domestic economic activity imposed by our current
balance of payment situation suggests a substantial deceleration of growth
rates is in prospect in the short term. To avoid a prolonged period of
substantially lower growth than that to which we have recently become
accustomed will require a significant strengthening in the competitiveness
of our manufacturing sector in both domestic and international markets,
combined with a favourable internal market situation for investment in
increased productive capacity.

This does not imply the desirability, in isolation, of a further sharp
depreciation of the $A; such a move has adverse inflationary consequences
and would aggravate our debt repayment problem. In the present circumstances
continued wage moderation is essential and, in the absence of accepted
practical alternatives, will be best achieved by amendment and refinement
of the principles embraced by the Accord. A repeat of the 1981-82 situation
- in which a substantial wage round was conducted in the face of an impending
slow-down in activity, thus aggravating the situation and being an important
element in deepening the subsequent recession - is the last thing required.
An indication of the success of the Accord to date is evident in that growth
in wages and total unit labour costs since mid 1983 have been lower than
the levels experienced in any of the comparable recovery periods of the
1970s and early 1980s.

The key factor in achieving balance of payments adjustment and maintaining
economic growth will be the performance of the Australian manufacturing
sector in increasing its share of both domestic and international markets.
Consideration of policies impacting on the entire range of factors affecting
international competitiveness is thus required. Industry policies have an
important role to play in achieving structural change in the Australian
economy, in complementing macroeconomic policies, and in reducing the pressure
to sacrifice growth as a means of accomplishing balance of payments adjustment.
These policies are aimed at improving the productivity and competitiveness
of Australian industries and embrace not just import competition, exports,
investment, technology and innovation, but also labour market and education
policies. Many of the individual components of a total industry strategy
are already operating. What is required is a coordination of these measures
with a view to making explicit the key objective of improving the international
competitiveness of Australian industry. However, it will take time to achieve
these adjustments. In the meantime, it appears inevitable that the constraints
imposed by our present balance of payments difficulties will lead to a markedly
slower growth outcome in the coming year. And the very grave danger exists
that this situation could be prolonged throughout the remainder of this
decade.

 A summary of the forecasts  

The factors impacting on this outlook are briefly summarised in this overview,
and discussed in some greater detail in the accompanying sections. The forecast
numbers are summarised in Table 1.1. The
  
contribution of various components to GDP growth is presented in Table 1.2,
and the contribution of the major expenditure components to growth in domestic
demand is shown in Table 1.3.

Growth in real GDP, both in aggregate and in the non-farm sector, is forecast
to slow appreciably in 1986-87; the forecast year-average growth for non-farm
product, at 2.5 per cent, is half that achieved in 1984-85 and anticipated
for the current year. Contractionary influences on economic growth in 1986
include the fiscal policy stance adopted in the August 1985 Budget and the
further restriction on growth in real budgetary outlays anticipated in the
coming budget, as well as the lagged impact of the interest rate increases
of 1985. The main expansionary influence during 1986 will be the
depreciation-induced improvement in international competitiveness, though
this is expected to be substantially eroded during the course of the forecast
period and its impact on import volumes will thus be more limited in the
first half of 1987. At that time, reactions to the recent declines in interest
rates and the net effect of the foreshadowed tax changes of September 1986
will be key influences in strengthening private sector demand.

The contribution of various components to GDP growth is evident in Table
1.2. Domestic demand growth continued to provide the main source of overall
growth in the current financial year, though itself decelerating as a result
of weaker growth in public sector expenditures and of the impact of high
interest rates upon availability of finance for housing and such
interest-sensitive areas as expenditure on consumer durables and private
equipment investment. A turnaround to a modest positive influence is evident
in movements in net export volumes, with growth in import volumes slowing
markedly in response to weaker domestic demand growth and earlier improvements
in competitiveness. However, movements in stocks continued to exert a small
negative influence on growth, as farm stocks were depleted to support export
sales and as weakening growth in sales and the impact of high interest rates
limited the accumulation of non-farm stocks.

Similar trends are anticipated in the coming financial year. Domestic demand,
though still easing in growth, will again provide the main stimulus. Net
export volumes will again exert a modest influence on growth, with weaker
growth in exports being matched by a small decline in import volumes. Stock
changes are also expected to detract from growth, with farm stocks again
being depleted and non-farm stocks being accumulated at a lower rate.

  

A feature of the forecasts is the continued weaker role to be played by
public sector expenditures. Growth in real government final consumption
expenditure is forecast to ease to 2.5 per cent, after rising by 6.5 per
cent in 1985-86 and by 7.5 per cent in 1984-85. Public sector capital
expenditures are expected to fall in real terms by 0.5 per cent, after rising
by 1.3 per cent in 1985-86 and in direct contrast to the strong growth of
12.8 per cent achieved in 1984-85.

The major influence on this impending slow-down in the public sector is
the more restrictive stance with respect to budgetary expenditure assumed
to be implemented by the Commonwealth government. Growth in total budget
outlays of 8.7 per cent has been assumed, resulting in a Commonwealth budget
deficit for 1986-87 of $5245 million, similar to the anticipated outcome
for this year. This deceleration will be achieved by restricting growth
in the Commonwealth's own net current expenditure on goods and services
and by the continuation of weak growth in transfer payments to the States,
Northern Territory and local government authorities. In particular, it appears
unlikely that the earlier agreement for a 2 per cent real increase in 1986-87
financial assistance grants will be fulfilled.

These restrictions will impact directly upon real Commonwealth consumption
expenditure on a payments basis and, on the deliveries basis of the national
accounts, should be supplemented by a much weaker contribution from the
overseas adjustment for defence item, arising from a variation in the timing
of delivery of defence equipment relative to prepayments. Slower growth
in consumption expenditure of state and local government is also in prospect,
as growth in their current account income is slowed by the restricted growth
in real current purpose grants from the Commonwealth and by the impact upon
indirect tax collections of weaker wages and salaries growth and of weaker
economic activity in general. Capital expenditure by Commonwealth public
enterprises should decline, as the completion of the aircraft re-equipment
programme of Qantas is replaced by a lower level of spending by TAA.
Expenditures by state and local government authorities will continue to
be constrained by a further decline in real terms in Commonwealth grants
from capital purposes and by a limit on borrowings.

Reflecting the improvement in the Commonwealth budget deficit, the overall
level of public sector borrowings has probably fallen by close to $2 billion
this year to a level equivalent to 4.5 per cent of nominal GDP. However,
little improvement in nominal terms is anticipated in the coming year, with
a similar deficit outcome in prospect for the Commonwealth budget and with
no change likely in the global limit on borrowings of public authorities.
As a ratio to nominal GDP, however, a decline to 4.1 is inferred.

In aggregate, the growth in private sector demand components will continue
to weaken as compared to the experience of the previous year. However, some
compositional shift is in prospect, with private business investment being
one component expected to accelerate in growth.

Growth in real private consumer expenditure is expected to ease to 2.5 per
cent in 1986-87, compared to an anticipated outcome this year of 3.5 per cent.
Household receipts are likely to grow more slowly, as weaker employment growth
offsets some strengthening of average earnings growth and as the current
trend of falling interest rates and an easing of the rental market reduces the
growth of non-wage incomes. However, the introduction of changes in personal
income tax scales in September 1986 will be sufficient to enable an unchanged
rate of growth in nominal household disposable incomes and, since inflation is
expected to improve, an increase in real disposable income growth. However,
a considerable portion of this improvement can be attributed to the
commencement of the superannuation round which is likely to be reflected
in the form of forced savings. Also, the non-farm saving ratio is likely
to be stimulated, particularly in the second half of the financial year,
by the resumption of rising interest rates and by lags in the reaction of
consumption to increases in disposable incomes arising from the tax changes.

