More or less equal? Australian income distribution in 1933 and 1980 Ian Mclean and Sue Richardson  

     Utilizing information in the 1933 census we estimate several
  measures of individual and household income inequality for that
  year. Allowance is made for the effect of the Depression on the
  1933 income distribution, revealing a clearly adverse impact.
  Comparisons with recent years indicate marked declines in
  aggregate income inequality.

   I Introduction  
The pursuit of an egalitarian ideal has a long history in
Australia. A widely shared objective during the colonial period
was the creation of a society free of extreme disparities in
wealth and income and of the rigid divisions of class that had
prevailed in Britain during the 18th and l9th centuries. These
aspirations found expression in the assertions of the miners'
rights on the goldfields, the squatter-selector conflicts of
the 1860s to 1880s, the rise of the trade union movement and
Labor parties, and in the innovative regulatory and social
welfare legislation that dates from the depressed years of the
1890s. Since Federation, policies to reduce perceived
inequalities have been part of the social and economic program
of all governments, State and Federal. What has been the
result?
     Our knowledge of trends in economic inequality over this
century is fragmentary, despite the social, political and
economic significance of the subject. The principal impediment
to an improved understanding is the limited amount of survey
information available on either income or wealth. An income
question was included in the special 1915 wartime survey of
private wealth holding (Knibbs, 1918). The 1933 population
census was the first to include a question on income: such a
question was not repeated until the censuses of 1976 and 1981.
No official surveys were conducted between 1915 and 1933, or
between 1933 and 1969, though an unofficial survey of household
expenditure was conducted in 1967 which collected details of
income. Beginning in 1969 the Australian Bureau of Statistics
began surveys of income distribution that have been repeated in
1974, 1979 and 1982. And in 1976 it conducted a survey of
household expenditure which also sought details of income. Thus
evidence for the period since the late 1960s is abundant
relative to that available for any earlier period, and the 1915
and 1933 censuses acquire considerable significance as sources
of information about long-run changes in income distribution.
This last-mentioned source has been totally ignored in previous
inquiries, yet it provides the only opportunity to observe the
distribution of income directly and in a comprehensive manner
in the half century between 1915 and the late 1960s. Although
serious obstacles face would-be users of the income-related
information in the 1933 census, our contention is that these
obstacles are surmountable.
     It is the primary purpose of this article to estimate the
distribution of income for 1933 in a manner that permits
comparisons with the official estimates for recent years. Brief
comparison is also made with the less reliable measures based
on the 1915 war census. In addition, we report an attempt to
take account of the different economic conditions that attended
the 1933 and recent censuses, namely, to estimate the degree of
inequality that might have existed in 1933 had the economy at
that time not been in severe depression.
     The paucity of survey evidence regarding inequality in
Australia has not prevented speculation about long-run trends.
In 1970 Encel wrote `the distribution of income appears to have
remained largely unchanged during this century' (quoted in
Jones, 1975, p. 21). In the most thorough and frequently cited
empirical assessment of this judgement, based on the evidence
of male incomes in the 1915 war census and 1969 ABS Survey,
Jones concluded, `It would require a mind peculiarly
resistant to evidence to deny that over the last half
century there has been a significant reduction in inequality of
income distribution among men' (Jones, 1975, p. 32), and
estimated that the Gini coefficient had declined from 0.420 to
0.338. One purpose in constructing income distribution
estimates for 1933 is to assess whether or not this decline has
been continuous. For three reasons our prior expectation was
that the decline occurred primarily after 1933. The major
expansion of redistributive social welfare programs dates from
the 1940s; unemployment has been lower in the post-war than
inter-war decades; and if Australian experience paralleled that
of the United States, it may be noted that marked declines in
American income inequality this century have been confined to
the 1930s and 1940s (Williamson and Lindert, 1980, Chap. 4).
     In the next section we briefly describe the 1933 census
information regarding income. We then report our procedures for
estimating the distribution of income in 1933 (Section III). In
Section IV the 1933 distribution is compared with those for
1915 and recent years using as a basis individual male and
female income recipients. In an effort to remove the effect of
the Depression on measured income inequality, we `re-employ'
part of those recorded as unemployed and the hidden unemployed
in 1933, and then re-estimate the distribution of income for
that year (Section V). There follows an attempt to convert the
1933 income data to a family rather than individual income unit
basis, and to compare family income inequality trends between
1933 and the present (Section Vl).

      II 1933 and the Census  
Either 1931 or 1932 marks the trough of the Depression,
depending on the choice of economic indicator, with some
recovery evident in most time series by 1933. For example, the
trade union based estimates of the unemployment rate peaked in
the June quarter of 1932 at 30 per cent, and over the ensuing
12 months had fallen to 26 per cent (Commonwealth Year Book,
1934, p. 739). The general unemployment rate similarly declined
from 21.4 to 19.3 per cent between 1931-32 and 1932-33, while
over the same period real GDP rose by 6 per cent and total
employment by 5 per cent. The census on 30 June 1933 thus
occurs at the end of a year in which a strong recovery in the
economy commenced.
     In his report on the census of 1933 the Commonwealth
Statistician, Roland Wilson, states that the decision to
include an income question for the first time was in part
`actuated ... by the special interest in the effects upon the
pattern of distribution produced by more than three years of
severe Depression'. But in addition to the special
circumstances of the time he indicates a more general
appreciation of the value of such information for the study of
inequality in Australia: he cites `the increasing need for
recurrent and comprehensive statistical measurement, in the
place of occasional and partial measurement, of income
distribution throughout the community' (Wilson, 1940, p. 332).
We share the same twin interests in the long-neglected evidence
he decided to collect. 
     The income question did not ask for actual values but for
an indication as to the class into which the respondent's
income fell. It follows that there is no census estimate of
total income either within any income class or for all classes.
There were seven classes: zero income; £1 to £51; £52 to
£103; £104 to £155; £156 to £207; 
£208 to £259; and £260 and over.
The basic information with which we must work is thus the
number of income recipients in each of the seven income
classes, cross-classified by such characteristics as sex, age,
marital status, grade of occupation, industry, religion and
State or territory of residence. The absence of precise income
data makes difficult enough the task of estimating means and
distributions within any closed income interval; it raises
special problems for the open-ended upper income group -
problems to which we return in the next section.
     The advice given on the census form concerning the
definition of income or earnings is worth quoting:

     all income for the year ended 30th June, 1933, by way of salary
     or wages or from any business must be included plus any income
     from property or other sources. The value of board and
     lodgings, rations, or other allowances received from an
     employer must be included.

     In every case the income to be stated is the total income for
     the year without deduction for household or domestic
     expenditure.

     Allowances received by wife from husband should not be included
     by wife as income nor should allowances from surviving parents
     or other relations be stated unless received as payment for
     services rendered.

     A strict interpretation might exclude some forms of income
(or imputed income) that the survey was meant to capture. The
Statistician notes, for example, that maintenance and
allowances in money or kind received from persons other than
employer (for example, from family or charities) might be
omitted. He also notes that there is likely to be
understatement of the imputed value of primary produce consumed
on farms (Wilson, 1940, p. 334).
     Two further comments on the census are warranted. First,
among those responding to the census, 2.4 per cent of male
breadwinners and 5.8 per cent of female breadwinners did not
state their income class. Whatever uncertainties surround the
accuracy of the recorded figures, comparatively few respondents
failed to answer the question. Second, for purposes of
comparison we treat the term breadwinner as equivalent to
income recipient, as this term is used in contemporary ABS
publications. In doing so, we acknowledge the possible
inaccuracy arising from the exclusion of dependants who receive
an income.

      III Estimating the 1933 Income Distribution  
As mentioned, it was necessary to estimate mean incomes
for the seven income intervals, and this posed particular
problems with the open-ended, highest income class of £260 and
over, and to a lesser extent with the interval that covered the
range of £1 to £52. For the other five (closed interval) income
classes we have simply adopted the mid-point of the range as
the average.
     For the bottom income interval of £1 to £51 Clark and
Crawford assign an estimate of £46.4 for average income (1938,
p. 9). Since the source of their estimate is unpublished, we
sought an independent assessment of this figure. From
information in the census regarding the occupational
composition of those recorded as receiving between £1 and £51,
it was possible, separately for males and females, to allocate
them into five occupational groupings: unemployed; self-
employed; wage and salary earners (full or part time) and
apprentices; pensioners, persons of private means, and persons
engaged in religious and benevolent institutions; and
employers. This provided a set of weights to apply to estimates
of the average income of each group. The weighted average
incomes thus derived for those earning less than £52 were £39
for males, £45 for females and £41 for persons.
     Two approaches were adopted in the estimation of the
average income for those reporting incomes of over £259. The
first was simply to impose a top-tail distribution (we are
dealing with the top 14 per cent of income recipients) drawn
from more complete censuses. This was done using the 1915 war
census and the 1979 income distribution survey data. Insofar as
some secular reduction in inequality was thought to have
occurred over this period, these alternative top-tail
distributions would be expected to produce upper and lower
bound estimates respectively of measures of inequality in 1933.
     The second approach was more direct. In principle it is
possible to adjust national income estimates to obtain a
measure of total personal income of residents consistent with
the census definitions. Subtraction of the estimate of total
income attributable to those earning less than £260
leaves a residual amount which then can be divided by the
number of income recipients recorded in the census as earning
over that amount. In practice the procedure is hazardous. The
most widely accepted and secure national accounts estimates for
1932-33 (Butlin, 1962) have been compiled from the production
rather than the income side. For national income figures
derived by the latter approach it is necessary to turn to the
contemporary estimates of Clark and Crawford (1938, p. 13). No direct
assessment of the reliability of these is possible in the absence of
alternatives; indirect assessment is feasible, however, by comparing other,
production-based national income figures Clark and Crawford arrived at with
those of Butlin.

