<sample>
	<id> J48 </id>
	


	<note> 2048 words </note>
	


	<source> Industrial relations and state education in Australia </source>
	


	<h> CHAPTER 3 </h>
	

	<h> TEACHERS AND INDUSTRIAL CONFLICT </h>
	


	<h> Introduction </h>
	
Militancy is best considered as a capacity to take overt action
of an aggressive nature in the quest for certain objectives.
The mode of expressing militancy can range from the `posture',
through the `threat', to the `action', and the action can range
from `persistence in discussion' (negotiation) to `mass
withdrawal of labour' (the strike). In extreme cases,
revolutionary action may be the chosen mode of expression. The
common thread is the existence of conflict between individuals
and/or groups and the origin of such conflict in basic
disagreements of aim, method or process. Militant action is a
response to the existence of such conflict.
  Australia's first teachers' strike occurred in 1920, in Western
Australia. Teachers and some public servants struck for three
weeks - this was the culmination of a campaign to secure
official recognition as the union representative of the
teachers in all negotiations. In New South Wales, the
organisational strength of the NSW Teachers' Federation (NSWTF)
was the foundation of a posture of militancy which, for many
years, facilitated its direct dealing with the Public Service
Board, the Education Department and the state Industrial
Commission. The Federation pursued both industrial and
professional interests in this direct manner, with concessions
gained through the process of demand, discussion and acceptance
of compromise solutions. Protest meetings and strike threats
were part of the industrial armoury.
  In Victoria in the 1940s, a campaign by teachers to obtain a
teachers' tribunal brought the Victorian Teachers' Union (VTU)
close to strike action. A ballot on the question of a one-day
stop work action was defeated by the narrowest of margins -
2587 (49.2 per cent) in favour, 2674 (50.8 per cent)against.
The campaign was one of militant action that did not, because
of the ballot, proceed to visible expression - the stoppage of
work, the strike. Strong and deep feelings and the belief in
the cause of reform caused the militancy to be expressed in
political action and the teachers, together with the Public
Service Association, campaigned successfully against the
government of the day. It was not until 1965 that the first
strike by Victorian teachers occurred; but the period did
witness a strong campaign of action, though stopping short of
strike action, by the Victorian Secondary Teachers' Association
(VSTA) over the issues of first, the secondary margin and
second, the reform of the teachers' tribunal and the right of
the VSTA to be recognised and heard by that body. Militancy in
respect of the secondary margin was also expressed in a union
internal political campaign and ultimately in the formation of
the breakaway union (which became the VSTA).

Stages of teacher militancy - the Australian experience
Examination of the historical development of teacher militancy
indicates the existence of four sequential, albeit overlapping,
periods. A dominant causal thread runs through each period, and
this identification of stages does not imply that issues cen
tral at one time necessarily disappear at another.
  In the earliest stage, the dominant need (demand) was the right
to represent, the right to bargain, the right to present a
case, the right of access of teacher organisations to the
decision-making process of the employer (the Department), and
the right of access of teacher unions to independent
authorities charged with determining wages and conditions of
employment. The expression of this need in Western Australia
and in Victoria has already been referred to in this chapter.
   A campaign for recognition - the right to bargain - as the
earliest base cause of militancy is not unusual within the
totality of the historical or comparative perspective of
industrial relationships. It was such an action that was taken
by the six farmers of Tolpuddle when they met and decided to
seek collectively to discuss (negotiate) wages with their
employer. The Tolpuddle Martyrs were charged under the
Combination Acts, and sentenced to transportation in 1835 but
they also became a symbolic point of the beginning of the
modern British trade union movement. In 1935 the United States
Congress passed the Wagner Act and established, among other
things, the National Labor Relations Board and a process of
government agency-monitored elections in work units, asking the
question: `Do you wish the union to bargain on your behalf?' A
positive answer meant that legal protection of the right to
bargain was established. In 1904, the Commonwealth Conciliation
and Arbitration Act in Australia provided for the registration 
of unions and consequent right of access by registered unions to 
the federal machinery of conciliation and arbitration. 
Constitutional questions precluded teacher unions (the State 
Teachers' Case of 1929) from the recognition provided by this 
statute, but the right to bargain was established for many 
other Australian unions. 
  During the late 1960s, the momentum of militancy concerning
issues related to conditions of education increased and became 
the central theme of disputation. The physical conditions 
under which teaching/education was undertaken was the basic 
cause, and the object of the action was the improvement of 
delivery (the business synonym would be the increasing of 
productivity), with the child, of course, as the beneficiary. 
The expression of this viewpoint was widespread, but was perhaps 
most clearly and strongly expressed by the VSTA as it 
`...developed a strike ideology which emphasises that industrial
action is for the betterment of both pupils and teachers'
(Bessant and Spaull 1972, p.82).
  Various general factors led to this second phase of teacher
militancy.

  1. Teachers' primary loyalties shifted from the employer to the
     union organisation, as post-war education became the
     responsibility of large unresponsive bureaucracies. There has 
     been a corresponding breakdown in informal relationships 
     between teachers and employers and an apparent lack of
     institutional democracy within the education system.
  2. Schooling was increasingly politicised, where the issue at
     education had become prominent in public life and national 
     economies had led to a sense of frustration, if not anger, 
     among teachers, that public expectations concerning the 
     importance of education and the teaching service were not 
     matched by government policy.
  3. Teacher militancy was an outcome of the inability of teacher 
     unions to be involved in policy making. Unions resorted to 
     electoral campaigns and demonstration stoppages, i.e. short 
     strikes associated with a protest movement.
  4. Teacher unions were beginning to extend their role-perceptions 
     in the light of the above conditions and the strength in 
     bargaining of trade unionism, so that they tended to see 
     themselves as trade unions as well as, or instead of,
     professional organisations; as a result, they adopted the
     techniques and tactics of the traditional trade union
     movement, including the strike. It was a change in outlook, 
     of `middle-class unionists acquiring working-class manners'
     (Spaull 1977).
  The central feature of this second stage is epitomised by the
resolutions of the strike meeting held by NSW teachers in October 
1968, when there were twelve resolutions related to the theme of 
the quality of education. Nevertheless, the last of the resolutions 
did condemn the `... failure to reopen the current salaries
agreements, thus denying a measure of salary justice to teachers 
and lecturers' (Mitchell 1975, p.202). There is just a hint - but 
no more, in this period - of the conditions of education being held 
as a legitimising device, either internally by the individual 
teacher or publicly by the organisation, to justify the action taken. 
However, the transition to the third stage was under way.
  The third stage (1972 to c. 1982) is identified by increasing
concern with salary/reward issues and with the broader issues
of the employment, remuneration and living standards of the
teacher. Strikes and militant political action are but two of
the ways in which this source of conflict has had expression in
recent years, in more than one state system.
  A fourth, and current, stage has been that identified with
conflict and militant action leading from (and then
intermingled with) protest and action about broader societal
issues such as trade union rights, universal medical care,
uranium mining, the peace movement and women's rights. Teachers
and teacher unions have been both as individuals and as group
members, deeply involved in militant action linked to such
issues. Such action which has taken place to date may not have
involved work stoppages, yet overt militant action has
occurred - in public protests, in marches and deputations, on
the floor at trade union conferences and in political action.
Action such as this has been added to action on issues more
clearly industrial or professional.
  The most recent manifestation of this has been the teacher
unions' expression of solidarity through publicity and
financial donation to the 1984 English miners' strike (the
Technical Teachers' Union of Victoria (TTUV) donated $10 000)
and to the sacked electric power workers in Queensland during
1985.
  Challenges have been to the closure of schools, to inspection
and control of entry, to disciplinary action by management and
to many other specific examples of incursions into the
`managerial prerogative'. In fact, there have been increasing
challenges not only to the right to manage, to authoritarian
management, but also to a range of power blocs (such as
developers and multi-nationals) and to the state itself. The
teacher strikes in New South Wales during 1985 are an example
of this challenge to authority.


	<h> Emergence and Growth of teacher strikes since 1965 </h>
	


	<h> New South Wales </h>
	
Trainee teachers in New South Wales held a half-day protest
against inadequate training salaries in 1951, but the first
major strike did not take place until October 1968, when an
estimated 65 per cent of membership stopped work after a salary
award, perceived as unfavourable, by the Industrial Commission.
A ballot in 1969 resulted in 9098 to 8090 against strike
action, but a one-day stop-work was the response a year later
to a ministerial request (instruction) that all teachers should
take an extra period each week as a contribution to overcoming
staff shortages. A one-day stoppage occurred in 1971 over
general conditions in schools, and from that point there was an
increasing readiness on the part of NSW teachers to resort to
stop-work and strike action in campaigns over industrial and
professional issues.
  Local and regional action, rolling strikes and state-wide
stoppages have occurred throughout the period. In 1974, one
newspaper's feature article (Australian, 1 April 1974) on the
militancy of the NSWTF declared:

   Neither the federation's senior officers nor the NSW Minister
   for Education, Mr Eric Willis, disagree with the assessment 
   that the federation is continually, and almost inevitably, in 
   conflict with him and his department. In fact, it has a 
   reputation for militancy that a Laurie Carmichael or a Jack 
   Mundy wouldn't be ashamed of. For a white-collar union, even 
   among the active Australian teachers' unions, it is pretty 
   well in a class of its own.

  During a prolonged dispute in 1985, an Australian Financial
Review editorial (11 March 1985) on public-service unionism
noted that the cause of the teacher strike was the transferral
of a teacher by the Department. `This is said by the union to
be against its policy - as if a union policy were above the law
and the executive discretion of government'. It also praised
the stand of the Minister for Education, who:

   ... is under attack from his faction and the unions for being
   tough with the teachers. In questioning such unionism, however,
   he is at one with the more intelligent socialists elsewhere who
   realise that their ideals and crude unionism have little in
   common.  

  The range and type of issues of NSW teacher strikes at state,
regional and local school levels can be seen in Table 3.1,
which represents a calendar of major NSWTF strikes over a ten-
year period, 1968-78.


	<note> TABLE </note>
	

  Since 1980, this pattern of NSW teacher strikes has continued
on a similar scale and with similar frequency. The types of
issues on which teachers have been prepared to take industrial
action have been extended and have resulted in a 2 1/2 day
strike by Sydney secondary teachers in 1981 over proposed
closures of several city high schools; strikes by infant-
teachers and TAFE lecturers over teaching loads and working
conditions in 1982; a two-day strike in 1984 by more than 4000
teachers in sympathy with a five-week strike by Migrant
Education Service teachers; and a one-day protest stoppage in
1984, in conjunction with other state public servants, over
government proposals to reduce benefits in the state
superannuation system. 


</sample>
