By Andrew Markus Introduction  

The complexity of Aboriginal responses to the invasion of their
land has strained, and in general eluded, European
understanding. The act of physical resistance was readily
intelligible, although it was the fashion for social
commentators and historians to belittle its extent, to discount
the courage and ingenuity of its perpetrators. But it was
another matter to fathom Aboriginal perspectives, to comprehend
strategies of resistance and forms of accommodation beyond the
rationality of the invader, a subject which has been explored
by Henry Reynolds. Little understood by most white Australians
distinctive Aboriginal values - in parts of the country a
world view and way of life - continue to survive.
     Optimal conditions for survival of Aboriginal traditions
were found in parts of the north and the interior: in areas
regarded as unsuitable for European economic activity, and in
circumstances of slow European penetration and non-intensive
land use which allowed Aborigines to maintain elements of their
culture alongside casual employment within the European
economy. Cultural maintenance was most difficult in the context
of rapid European incursion, leading to the swamping of the
existing population and its rapid numerical decline as a
consequence of disease and physical conflict. The extent to
which the remnant populations retained their traditional
culture remains a subject of dispute. The long accepted view
that they constituted demoralised, dispirited, amoral victims,
caught between two worlds and fitting neither, has come
increasingly under challenge from a new generation of
historians.
     One approach to an understanding of these remnant
populations is through a study of their attempts to influence
the political system established by the British in Australia.
It could not be maintained that such a study directs attention
to the heart of Aboriginal existence, but it does have the
virtue of engaging one aspect of their lives on which written
evidence survives in relative abundance, and beyond its
intrinsic interest it has the potential to furnish insights
into questions of wider significance. To the present there has
been little historical research into this aspect of post-
frontier politics and a number of misconceptions are to be
found in the general works which cover the subject. Thus a
current Department of Aboriginal Affairs publication on the
history of land rights can state that "the first public
protests by Aboriginals" occurred in the 1930s; according to
Lorna Lippmann the "first Aboriginal strike took place in
1945"; in Richard Broome's view it was not till William
Ferguson and John Patten "penned a manifesto entitled
`Aborigines Claim Citizenship Rights'" in 1938 that "the
Aboriginal version of Australian history" was "set down on
paper for the first time by Aborigines themselves".
     The influence of Aborigines on the British political
process dates from the early period of British occupation. This
influence stemmed from their physical resistance to
"settlement" and peaked at a time when Aborigines were
operating outside the British political system, often with
limited or no understanding of its operation. It did not take
long, however, for groups of Aborigines to attempt to operate
within its terms, although not necessarily for ends sanctioned
or understood by the British.
    One early focus for this activity was the attempt to obtain
British title to land, with the objective of adopting a
sedentary agricultural existence. Within the first years of
British occupation of South Australia, for example, Aborigines
made personal appeals for plots of land. In 1859 a deputation
of Victorian Aborigines to William Thomas, the government
official responsible for their welfare, was successful in
obtaining land for cultivation. Additional land was set aside
by governments and a subsequent focus for political activity
was the attempt to secure acceptable management practices and
resources for development. Later again, extending to the
present day, Aborigines defended themselves against attempts
to deprive them of land reserved for their benefit. In the
1870s and 1880s Victorian Aborigines, most notably the
residents of the Coranderrk reserve near Melbourne, were
sufficiently familiar with the British political system to
achieve major victories. Through their actions, which included
strikes, petitions and deputations to leading politicians
including the Premier, they provoked two parliamentary
inquiries and numerous minor investigations and obtained what
appeared to be secure title to the reserve.
     In the first half of the twentieth century Aborigines
continued to suffer the lot of a dispossessed people who were
relegated to, and some would argue adopted by choice, a place
on the margins of the Anglo-Australian world. In this period
the racial ideology which marked them as a stone-age remnant
destined for extinction in the near future was further
elaborated. Aborigines continued to wage battles for the
retention and development of reserves, particularly in the
south-east of the continent, although often with less success
than in the nineteenth century. There was, however, a new
problem to be faced. While acts of physical violence against
Aborigines became less frequent in the more settled parts of
the country, a new feature of their relationship with Anglo-
Australians was the imposition of legislation with potential
to control practically all aspects of their lives: their
freedom of movement and association, choice of employment,
right to dispose of assets as desired, including wages, and to
marry and raise families. While lack of bureaucratic and
financial resources meant that legislative controls were not
fully utilised, nearly all Aborigines were deprived of basic
political rights, their personal freedoms were limited, and
they were commonly discriminated against by employers. Many
lived in fear of government officials who had the power, most
notably exercised in Queensland, to compel residence on
reserves, and in most states to remove children by force.
     The interwar period, particularly the 1930s, marked the
beginnings of change in policy towards Aborigines. Aboriginal
spokespersons, and by the late 1920s a small group of whites,
including clergymen, academics, female philanthropists,
businessmen, and politicians, urged governments to accept that
extinction was not an inevitability, that it was possible for
Aborigines to `advance' towards `civilization' with the
appropriate guidance. By 1934 white pressure groups, given
favourable publicity in major newspapers, were of sufficient
strength to force the commonwealth to halt an openly planned
punitive expedition following the killing of a policeman in
what became known as the Tuckiar case. During the second half
of the decade there was reconsideration of policy at the
highest levels of government. In April 1937 the first
nationwide conference of administrators with control over
Aborigines met in Canberra. Concerned with the significant rise
in the number of people of mixed descent, the conference
resolved that "the destiny of the natives of aboriginal origin,
but not of the full blood, lies in their ultimate absorption
by the people of the Commonwealth". In the following year the
federal government, with responsibility for Aborigines in the
Northern Territory, announced new policy initiatives and was
in the process of recasting its administrative structure when
the outbreak of war altered priorities. While those involved
in seeking to reform policies had reason for hope, there were
also many disappointments and grounds for despair, a common
feature of a time of change. On the one hand they received an
increasingly sympathetic hearing, particularly from ministers, and new policies were being discussed
and adopted; yet some states, including New South Wales, seemed
to turn a deaf ear to suggestions for change while others,
notably Queensland and Western Australia, continued to
strengthen their discriminatory powers, broadening the
definition of `Aborigine' to formalise control over those of
even remote descent.
     A number of organisations attempted to influence
government policy. While both Aboriginal and white Australians
were involved there was a tendency for them to remain
separate, one factor being the reluctance of white reformers
to accept that Aborigines had anything to contribute. Thus the
most prominent of the organisations, the Sydney based
Association for the Protection of Native Races, was in practice
exclusively white. The organisations formed by Aborigines were
willing to accept assistance from white sympathisers but they
generally attempted to prevent non-Aboriginals from acting as
spokespersons. Aboriginal political activity in the inter-war
period, often pursued on the British model in the south, was
marked by a transition from movements grounded in specific
communities and with narrow, community-oriented objectives, to
broadly based capital city organisations with interstate links
and objectives designed to address needs throughout the
country.
    In November 1926 Aborigines of mixed descent in the south-
west of Western Australia, "tired of being robbed, and shot
down, or run into miserable compounds", decided to form a
union "in order to obtain the protection of the same laws that
govern white man"; in the words of one activist, Norman Harris,
the objective was to "get a vote in the country also one law
for us all that is the same law that governs the whites also
justice for fair play". One of the movement's leaders, William
Harris, had been active for over twenty years in protesting
against the mistreatment of Aborigines. In March 1928 a
deputation met with the Premier to request:

That there be unrestricted admittance of educated aborigines
  to Perth.
That aborigines from various tribes should not be drafted to
  settlements where they were likely to meet members of hostile
  tribes.
That aboriginal police should not be placed in control of
  settlements.
That aborigines should be allowed to carry firearms, as
  prohibition prevented them from providing for their needs.
That there should be no discrimination between full-blooded and
  half-caste aborigines under the act.
That aborigines in the north should be subject to different
  control from those in the south.
That those educated up to the standard of white men should be
  exempt from the Aborigines Act.

     In New South Wales returning Aboriginal servicemen had
petitioned in 1919 for "civic rights". Growing political
activity led in February 1925 to the formation of the
Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association. Under the
presidency of Frederick Maynard the Sydney based association
linked the activities of a number of communities, and by August
1925 claimed eleven branches and a membership of 500 people.
It remained active till at least 1927. In the view of Heather
Goodall its "first and major demand was ... for land, as an
economic base and as a compensation for dispossession". In
addition, it called for the halting of the forcible removal of
Aboriginal children from their families, full citizenship
rights, and the abolition of the Protection Board and its
replacement by one composed of Aborigines, although with a
government-appointed chairman.
     Aborigines were also active in Melbourne during the late
1920s, with Thomas James and his son Shadrach acting as leading
spokesmen. Thomas James, regarded by the press as a "full
blooded Australian black," was a European-educated Tamil from
Mauritius. He had been employed as a teacher of Aborigines
along the Murray, first in 1881 at Maloga Mission School and
from 1888 at the Cumeroogunga reserve, and had married an
Aborigine, Ada Cooper, in 1885. Following his retirement he
moved to Melbourne where it was reported in June 1929 that he
was leading a group of mission-educated Aborigines who planned
to meet with the Prime Minister to ask for improved education
facilities and opportunities for employment. Their specific
objectives included the transfer of control over Aborigines
from the states to the commonwealth, increased provision of
vocational training including the establishment of training
farms, improved opportunities for Aborigines to obtain land,
and the removal of restrictions to employment in Government
departments.
     James's son Shadrach addressed the Australian National
Missionary Council conference in April 1929 to call for
assistance in persuading the commonwealth government to change
its policy towards Aborigines. He was subsequently a
representative at a meeting in the same month between the
Minister for Home Affairs and missionary and welfare societies
which was called to consider commonwealth policy in the
Northern Territory. At this meeting James moved unsuccessfully
for consideration of Aboriginal policy in a national
perspective. In a newspaper interview at the time of the
conference he praised the work of missionaries while
highlighting the lack of opportunities available to his people
and the discrimination under which they suffered; he called for 
"an aboriginal representative in Parliament, and a native
administrator working for us under the direction of the Minister".

