Some questions on the economic and regional history of Sicily in the fourth
century B.C.  

  The historian of Sicily in any period of antiquity is confronted by the
paucity of the surviving evidence. The written evidence tends to concentrate
on the most distinguished individuals of the time. Even Diodoros, who sought
to include a continuous account of the history of his native island within
his universal history, with mention, when possible, of his hometown Agyrion,
concentrates on these men. Since the leading figures of the fourth century
were active in Syracuse - this is true of both the tyrants, the two Dionysii
and Agathokles and of the liberators, Dion and Timoleon - we have a history
of Syacuse rather than of Sicily. Archaeological evidence can go some way
to remedy this problem since a great deal of excavation has been done in
Sicily in recent years. But even here we are faced with the problem of
incomplete evidence. For example, the excavations conducted at Akragas
have so far produced no material from the fifth century or the first half
of the fourth. But literary evidence shows that Akragas was inhabited and
prosperous, down to the Carthaginian sack in 406 B.C.
  The nature of the surviving evidence creates problems if one wishes to
write the history of Sicily from any viewpoint other than that of the leading
figures at Syracuse. Nevertheless, there is evidence, both literary and
archaelogical, which throws some light on other aspects of Sicilian history.
It is possible to draw some conclusions on the economic history of Sicily
in the fourth century and on the way in which different regions of Sicily
developed.
  Serious controversies exist, however, on a number of key issues which
are central to the interpretation of this period of Sicilian history. The
views of the excavators, Orlandini and Adamesteanu, on the dating of
archaeological evidence from the region of Gela have generally been accepted.
However Navarra has made a wide-ranging critique of their conclusions and
also casts doubt on other generally accepted views. He would see the site
of ancient Gela at Licata rather than modern Gela (medieval Terranova) and
identifies the ancient Halykos with the modern Salso rather than the Platani.
  But Navarra is forced to make several unlikely assumptions. He concludes
that Terranova was the site of the necropolis of Lindioi, even thought its
citizens lived at Licata and that the Spartan prince Dorieus' colony of
Herakleia was located at Terranova, and not, as is generally believed, near
Eryx at the western extremity of the island. But in that case it is hard
to see why the Segestans and the Phonicians should have attacked Dorieus'
colony, or why the survivors should have fled to Minoa, closer to the
Phoenician zone than Terranova.
  For our purposes Navarra's most significant argument is that the fourth
century remains from Gela-Terranova, especially the coins, are of Agathoklean
or later date and that evidence for habitation of the town in the Timoleontic
period is lacking. However Syracusan coins from the period of Timoleon have
been found at Terranova.

The coin evidence shows that the site at Terranova was inhabitated from
the time of Timoleon into the early third century, when we know the Geloans
were moved to the new city of Phintias. The evidence does support the dating
and identification of the excavators.
  Pietrina Anello has challenged the accepted view that the widespread
circulation of Corinthian pegasi in Sicily sarted with the Timoleontic revival
of the second half of the century. She points out that the acceptance of
foreign coins in general usage was more likely to have happened in the first
half of the century, when only two Sicilian cities were still minting, rather
than later in the century, when minting had been resumed by many cities.
  This is not in total conflict with the accepted view. For example, Talbert
explains the widespread use of pegasi in Sicily, by their having entered
a "coinage vacuum" where there was little coin in circulation. The important
fact is the relative scarcity of pegasi in the hoards of the first half
of the fourth century in Sicily. But it seems likely that the penetration
of pegasi into Sicily on a large scale may have started before the Sicilian
cities recommenced coining themselves on a large scale, which would cast
doubt on Talbert's conclusion that the process commenced only after the
battle of the Crimisus. So we must take care in using the influx of Pegasi
into Sicily as evidence on Sicilian history.
  A third issue on which there is modern controversy is the development
of large agricultural holdings. Most writers have assumed that in Sicily,
as in most parts of the Greek world in the fourth to the first century B.C.,
property became increasingly concentrated in few hands. This view has been
most strongly argued for Sicily by Lukas de Blois, who sees an increasing
concentration of wealth into a few hands, temporarily broken up by the
Timoleontic colonisation and the process resuming again thereafter.
  But an important part of the evidence for this view is Diodoros' account
of the slave rebellion in Sicily, which shows the island as dominated by
Latifundia. But Verbrugge has shown Diodoros' account, in which the island
is dominated by pastoral production is incompatible with our other evidence,
which shows cereal production to be the island's major industry.
  Verbrugge sees the story of the servile insurrection as cover for a
provincial uprising. Some participation in the revolt by free Sicilians
seems likely, though it is not clear why the Romans would have been willing
to downgrade the nature of their victory from one over free provincials
to one over rebellious slaves, as Verbrugge assumes. But for our purposes,
what is important is not the nature of the late second century rebels, but
the concentration of wealth for which Diodoros' latifundia are cited as
evidence. In view of the doubts raised over Diodoros' evidence, it is hardly
safe to use that evidence to draw conclusions on the Sicilian economy in
the second century, let alone in the fourth.
  Verbrugge argues from Cicero's Verrines that even in the first century
B.C. Sicilian agriculture was still dominated by small family farms. But
II Verrines 3.27, which he cites as evidence shows us that at Agyrion farming
was in the hands of local citizens - it does not tell us the size of their
farms.
  Even without the unreliable evidence of Diodoros, a good case can be made
for the concentration of farming land in a relatively few hands in Sicily
after Timoleon's time. As early as Agathokles' time, we once again find
an impoverished demos as a key factor in the politics of Syracuse. The
concentration of population in Syracuse and Akragas at the expense of the
smaller centres whose recovery Timoleon had promoted also suggests the
re-emergence of a large class of absentee landlords, since family farmers
need to live close to their livelihood. The fact that in Cicero's time land
in the ager Leontinus was owned by only one family from Leontinoi and by
numerous citizens of the free city of Centuripa suggests concentration of
land ownership and absentee landholding on a large scale.
  We can see from the scattered evidence that there was no single pattern
of change in land ownership through all Sicily, and we cannot tell precisely
what happened in any given place. But it does seem clear that there was
a tendency towards concentration of land ownership in Sicily after Timoleon's
time, affecting different communities in different ways, but, contrary
to Diodoros' account, not involving large scale Roman involvement under
the Republic.
  Another general trend which can be seen in our evidence is the devastation
of most of Sicily at the end of the fifth century and a renewal of prosperity
in the second half at the time of Timoleon's settlement. Once again, there
are local variations visible in the way these developments affected various
communities, and we can rarely perceive the locally influential factors.
  The literary evidence is quite clear. The Carthaginians destroyed Selinous
and Himera in 409 B.C. In 406 B.C. they sacked Akragas, while Dionysios
forced the abandonment of Gela and Kamarina to save their populations.
In 396 B.C. the Carthaginian attack fell on the straits of Messina, to cut
off Syuracuse from possible help from other Greek communities in Italy or
the homeland, and Messana was also destroyed.
  Dionysios waged war with equal savagery, ravaging the Carthaginian province
in 397 B.C. and sacking Motya. In south Italy he destroyed Kaulonia, Hipponium
and Rhegion, while as late as 368 B.C. he was once again devastating the
territory of Selinous and of Entella.
  This destruction was not total, as we find in the 405/4 treaty between
Dionysios and Carthage that Himera, Selinous and Akragas were to be under
Carthaginian rule while Gela and Kamarina were to be unwalled and pay tribute
to Carthage. We find citizens of these places joining Dionysios in 397 and
384, Akragas revolting from him in 393 and those from the east of Minoa
joining Dion on his march on Syracuse in 357 B.C. But these references do
not necessarily show anything more than that a disorganised remnant of the
original population was still to be found there.
  The ancient sources definitely depict the cities of south-central Sicily
as deserted when Timoleon restored them and even Syracuse as suffering from
a shortage of population. The literary evidence indicates a serious
depopulation of Sicily for all the first half of the fourth century B.C.,
with Central Sicily as the worst affected area, although even there the
depopulation was not total.
  But our literary evidence undoubtedly depends on the writings of Timaios,
whom, we may recall, Polybios accused of exaggerating the deeds of his hero
to make him appear unduly distinguished. Fortunately, we have archaeological
evidence which confirms the general outline derived from Timaios.
  The information on Gela is the most detailed in the period between 405
B.C. and 338 B.C.; there are only the most limited signs of habitation,
most notably two shrines of the goddess Athena, which would seem to have
lain outside the original walls of the city and were in continuous use from
the sixth century to the time of Timoleon.
  Built in Timoleon's time the hill of Gela was covered with newly built
houses, extending to its western end. This area had not been inhabited in
the fifth century, and the new town spread over an old fifth century cemetery.
At the same time a massive circuit of walls was built to defend the city.
These are securely dated by both pottery and coins associated with them
to the Timoleontic era.
  After Agathokles' conquest of Gela in 311/10 B.C., the eastern section
of the city was abandoned while the western part remained inhabited until
the Mamertine destruction of 282 B.C. and the relocation of the Geloans
by Phintias, tyrant of Akragas. Orlandini believes that the site was then
abandoned until Fredrick II's foundataion of Terranova in 1233 A.D. while
Adamesteanu draws attention to a byzantine cemetery at the foot of the hill
and suggests that some form of habitation existed on the site in this period.
  The evidence on Akragas is less extensive, as we saw above, but it is
clear that there was extensive new building in the city in Timoleon's time
and, as in Gela, this took place in areas not inhabitated even in the fifth
century. Unfortunately, as even less of Akragas, than of Gela, has been
excavated, we cannot tell whether this represents an enlargement of the
inhabited area of the city or merely a relocation of that area. It has been
estimated that the total inhabited area of Akragas would have held a population
of 16,000 to 18,000 people. This represents a considerable concentration
of population, but we cannot be certain that the figure applies to the
Timoleontic (or any other) period.
  Similar patterns of devastation and resettlement can be seen elsewhere
in Central Sicily. At Kamarina, for example, the fifth century walls were
destroyed in large part and not replaced until the Timoleontic era.

