Reinventing the Real: Politics and Photography Jocelyn Clarke  

Many art theorists would argue that the problems of photography
are its own and bear no relation to those of the State and the
economy. Many political scientists would agree. I shall argue that
political scientists and art theorists are facing some of the same
theoretical issues. Nevertheless there is very little dialogue
between them. On the whole semiotics have passed political science
by, and the new developments in political science, which are
perhaps less momentous, have passed art theorists by. As a
political scientist I too suffer from the ignorance and one-
sidedness I am complaining of, and no doubt this will soon become
obvious.

Most of us, even political scientists, have moved beyond the
naivete which characterised the Family of Man school of photography
and the early socialist photographers and critics who believed
(without much theoretical foundation in Marxism for their view)
that photographs of starving workers' children and bloated
capitalists would raise the consciousness and stir the anger of the
masses. The most cursory examination of the advertising industry
indicates that the techniques of persuasion are not easy or direct
and need to be grounded in an understanding of the whole culture
and its codes. But the advertising professional accepts and reinforces the 
culture as it is, wishing only to alter the customer's
behaviour in one small particular, shifting the customer's
preference from one brand or one product to another. The socially
critical artist has the much more difficult task of somehow
contesting or undermining the culture and the code. The artist may
not wish to do anything so difficult but simply to present some
small vision or insight which is not part of the mainstream; but,
because the culture hangs together, to contest some detail is
either to contest the whole or simply to fail to communicate one's
vision.

My lack of skill as a typist sometimes produces a form of automatic
writing, like that practised by the Surrealists. In an early draft
of this essay, I used the cliche `reinventing the wheel' which was
transmuted into `reinventing the real'. When political art (that
is, art which challenges the status quo in some way - all art is
in some sense political) succeeds it is most often by reinventing
the real, and the photographic image with its spurious air of
realism is particularly suited to doing this. Reinventing reality
means not only giving reality to an invention, but also redefining
reality and calling other realities into question.

For many people politics means politicians and party conflict,
something like football, our team against theirs. A 1983 survey by
the Commonwealth Electoral Office found that these definitions were
irrelevant to more than 500,000 Australians who were not enrolled
to vote, despite the laws compelling them to do so. Politics are
about conflict, inequality, and the struggle for resources but are
also about consensus, legal and administrative systems, rules of
the game and fixed policies. Perhaps it is something like football.
After all, the rules of the game provide the framework for
conflict, and the game has an outcome and winners who, in the case
of politics, can determine policy or even change the rules. Another
way of thinking of politics is as a series of picture frames of
different sizes, one inside the other: the larger frames at the
outer edge of the nest of the frames represent the broader and more
basic areas of conflict and consensus; the smaller frames near the
centre of the nest represent the day to day conflicts and consensus
involved in elections and policymaking, where the scope of the
conflict is more narrowly defined.

The State, says Max Weber, has the monopoly of legitimate violence
within the bounds of a given territory, and he points out that this
blending of legitimacy and violence in the State gives rise to the
characteristic moral dilemmas of politics. Legitimacy for Weber
is the lawfulness of government behaviour in the opinion of the
subjects of that government. It is not lawfulness according to any
particular law or even the constitution but according to the
people's standards of what is right, based upon the particular
mixture of legality, tradition and charisma that they favour. Thus
we could say that President Nixon was regarded by Americans as a
legitimate ruler until the later stages of The Watergate scandal
when he lost legitimacy. In this essay I have used legitimacy and
illegitimacy in a broader sense than Weber does, so as to include
the Judgements of individuals as well as of people in the aggregate
about what is politically acceptable to them.

Most students of politics, including Jean-Jacques Rousseau who
wrote two centuries before Weber, agree that a government requires
both means of force or violence and legitimacy in order to rule.

The strongest is never strong enough to be always master, unless
he transforms strength into right, and obedience into duty.

Bertrand Russell, writing in the 1930s, was a bit more pessimistic,
saying that in the past no government had ever ruled for long by
force alone, but in the future technology would make it possible.

Just as nations and individuals have different ideas of what are
and are not legitimate governments for them (most Iranians seem to
regard the Ayatollah Khomeiny's rule as legitimate, most other
nations would reject his style of charismatic theocracy); ideas of
reality are also relative. Differences between nations and social
groups on the question of what is `real' form part of the subject
matter of sociology and anthropology. Societies vary in the degree
of political disagreement they will tolerate, but few will tolerate
much questioning of their notions of reality. In most modern
societies the individual with unorthodox notions about reality is
usually sent to a psychiatrist. Perhaps artists are allowed a
little more licence. For most people the political system under
which they live is legitimate and taken for granted, and the
reality system even more so.

Political theorists and activists have recently begun to stretch
and extend our definitions of politics to include the reality
system and all the things which seem most basic and unquestionable
in our society, for example, capitalism, democracy, motherhood,
masculinity/femininity. These ideas, some more than others, also
work at the level of visual images. Hence John Berger has been able
to analyse the hitherto unquestioned place of the female nude in
Western art and what it means in terms of power relationships.

A central category in political science is the distinction between
public and private. Perhaps the simplest way to explain this
distinction is to imagine the agora, the market and assembly place
for male Athenian citizens in classical times, as representing the
public sphere. In Athens the civic and business concerns of men
belonged to the public sphere, their familial concerns and the
lives of women, children, slaves and foreigners belonged to the
private, although the activities of these non-citizens might be
regulated by the legislators in the agora. Generally the public
equalled the political, the private sphere was non-political.
Through history the boundaries of public and private have shifted
with the growth of the welfare (or intrusive) State and the
admission of women into political life. On the other hand,
capitalist ideology stresses the private nature of businessmen's
economic decisions, thus contracting the public realm. In the
twentieth century art is regarded in the communist world as
belonging to the public political realm; but in the West art is
seen as essentially private, although it is marketed as a
commodity. The artist presents his or her personal vision and
members of the public respond in terms of their own personal
visions. The distinction between public and private persists. It
was first seriously challenged by the civil rights movement, the
women's movement and student groups in the early 1960s. Since then
political scientists, influenced by these groups, have been pushing
and stretching the boundaries of `politics'.

... there is a political dimension to all significant human
transactions ... Of all the institutions that mediate values and
here need be considered as having a political dimension the most
neglected by modern political science and equally most adopted
by contemporary liberation movements is the family ... The real
political disputes are in fact those over the scope of the
political ... 

Current definitions of politics often stress inequality and the
struggle for resources as defining features of politics, hence well
entrenched inequalities like the inequality of women and men, are
now seen as part of politics. Until recently Marxism has been like
`bourgeois' political science in setting narrow limits for the
political, confining politics to the public sphere and largely
identifying politics with the State. The efforts of Marxists to
extend their definition of politics and tackle the thorny problem
of the relationship in Marxist theory between the economic base and
the superstructure (which includes art and politics) have led to
greater stress on the role of ideology rather than on coercion in
maintaining capitalist domination. This concern with ideology is
taken to its logical extreme in Althusser's notion of ideological
state apparatuses.

This is not to say that all the battles have been won. People who
study the politics of the family or women and politics, as I have
done, are often made to feel pretty marginal by our colleagues, the
`real' political scientists. And here I am on another
margin - politics and photography. Perhaps professional caution is
understandable; there are problems for the working political
scientist with expanded definitions of politics. The subject of
politics gets too big to handle. Although we may subscribe to the
broader definitions in theory, we find that in practice we have to
set our own limits for each piece of work.

There are occasions on which it is useful to concentrate on
politics in the narrow sense, on the State and policy. Vicki
Randall suggests a useful compromise, that we adopt not one
definition of politics but two and use them both according to the
needs of the issue. She says that the more traditional view 

... see politics as an activity. It is conscious, deliberate
participation in the process by which resources are allocated
amongst people. The alternative view, which has become more
influential recently, tends to equate politics with the
articulation, or working out of relationships within an already
given `power structure'. 

Each view of politics is appropriate in some contexts. In the 
remainder of this essay I shall mainly follow the second 
view of politics but I shall also make use of the classical
Weberian concepts of legitimacy, boundaries and violence, treating
them in a very broad and sometimes metaphorical way.

The artist, like the political ruler, operates within a given
territory. The photographer's territory includes the physical limits
of the photograph or series of photographs and the system of
meanings in a culture. Indeed the political ruler impinges on the
cultural territory of the artist and seeks to define it.

When you are looking through the viewfinder of a camera you are
inevitably faced with the problem of framing and boundaries; it is
part of your critical distance, an arbitrary piece of surgery that
no-one books in for. 

Much of the work in this book explores the meanings of boundaries
in our lives.

Some of the unintentional humour of amateur photography comes from
the fact that the photographer is not in control of the boundaries.
We feel sure that the amateur photographer did not intend to
present Aunt Ethel without a head, to include a strange child with
our children or cut out half of Uncle Fred. But photographers who
are in control of the boundaries of their pictures differ in their
attitudes to them. Boundaries may be taken for granted and, in a
sense, avoided by the use of symmetrical composition and the
gathering of all the important things into the middle of the
photograph, or boundaries may be problematical, broken, shifting.

When some of Jillian Gibb's work was exhibited at the National
Gallery of Victoria in 1983, it was hung in the Photography Gallery
on the floor above the exhibition of the European Collection,
mainly paintings ranging from the fifteenth to nineteenth centuries. 
                                                          
