<sample>
	<id> J61 </id>
	



	<note> 2026 words </note>
	


	<source> Futur*fall: Excursion into Post-Modernity </source>
	


	<h> Modernism meets modernity: great combusting conjunctures! </h>
	


	<bl> By Terry Smith </bl>
	

What is the Post-Modern? Why has it appeared so prominently, so
(apparently) recently? In whose name is the Post-Modern spoken?
With what effects? These are the questions Foucault has taught us
to ask when we seek to decipher the operations of power within the
circulatory systems, the dispensaries of knowledge. There are, of
course, no simple, singular answers, nor even the possibility of
a set of answers of the same type - because the concept has
appeared in different discourses, with distinct, even unrelated
meanings. Here, however, I want to apply Foucault's questions to
the use of the `Post-Modern' as a marker within the urge to define
periods; periods of history - human, social, cultural, artistic,
of fashion of thought - even a period apparently beyond history.
Specifically, I am interested in the play-off between `modernism'
and `post-modernism' within avant-garde art and architecture, and
will argue that they are shaped within broader psycho-social
regimes, including that of `Modernity'. Whether these relationships
have shifted sufficiently in recent years to indicate the emergence
for a regime of `Post-Modernity' remains, for me, an open question.
It is a question, moreover, to which I suggest we apply the same
critical scepticism, however rootless, that is one of the positive
productivities of modernism.


	<h> Import Rhetoric: Necessity and Scarcity </h>
	

In a paper entitled `Catatonia' given during the first Foreign
Bodies Conference in Sydney in 1981, Meaghan Morris concluded with
two questions about the theme of that conference - `semiotics
in/and Australia'. As this Conference may qualify as the second
`Foreign Bodies' one, I would like to repeat her questions to see
if they might not apply to `post-modernism' here:

  So what I want to know is: what purpose does it serve to posit a
  semiotics (post-modernism) which isn't what we do, and what purpose
  does it serve to posit an orthodox semiotics (post-modernism) which
  we don't do any more, but we all know we never did anyway? 
	<misc>(Morris
  1981:139) </misc>
	

So far, `post-modernism' as a concept has served the interests of
a few artists, performers and writers, mainly in Melbourne, and has
become a banal mannerism in architecture. As a piece of import
rhetoric, however, it has much impact, a hovering implication, an
absence of something so much more complete elsewhere, but making
space here for both the superficial and the significant.

Consider first superficial Post-Modernism as it appears in
architecture. It replays in reverse the strategy of the apologists
for the Modern Master architects: whereas they rendered nineteenth-
century architecture irredeemably past, ridiculing it as
superficially historicist, Post-Modernism attempts to render the
modern past by claiming that only the superficial and the
historicist are possible now. Some lovers of `mass cult' share this
view. It follows that all the structural tensions within the modern
are occluded Modern Art, the avant-gardes (critical and fascistic),
Modernism (critical and institutionalised), the anti-modernist
criticisms - are seen as aspects of the same institutionalised
failure, symbolised for Huyssen (1981) and others by the success
of the big Beaubourg survey shows of the critical avant-garde
(although this is only a partial reading of those shows, and their
significance). Repulsion from occlusion was exactly what propelled
the anti-modernists of the early 1970s, but, unlike them,
superficial post-modernists have only the slender sociality of
opportunism.

There is a significant other. A story completed, a history ended,
leaving to the survivors only the opportunity to gaze sadly,
angrily, nostalgically, at random fragments of the end of history
as such. Thus Ted Colless at the First Foreign Bodies Conference
(1981:154):

  The simple story is that all the shooting off about post-modernity,
  post-movementism, transversalism, nomadic desire and semiotic
  delinquency is the banal re-run of vanguardism that, even in its
  heyday, was nothing but a useful fiction of speed for a history
  that has futurised itself into a terminal concussive stability,
  the intransigent escalation of global security.

The `repeat' quality (in the TV programming term) of even this
depth of despair is admitted by all: for example, J.F. Lyotard's
(1984:16) first response to the question `What is Post-Modern?' is
`Certainly it is part of the modern... Post-modernism thus
understood is not modernism at its end, but rather modernism at its
very beginning - and that beginning is always recurrent'.
Superficial `post-modernism', therefore, parallels those much-
advertised alcohol substitutes: the modernism you have when you
have finished having one - or, more precisely, the avant-garde you
have when you're not having a modernism.

Can I try to clarify my position here? I resist the invitation to mere 
indulgence in the cloying closures of `mass culture' imagery, which is 
all you end up with after Adrian Martin's (1984) absorbing critiques 
of everything else. Being `swept away' by it is an utterly inadequate 
response to the recession blues in which this response claims to be 
socially based. I resist the invocation of a new artistic style with 
its blind-eye shrug towards reaping the rewards of art institutions 
sick of being criticised/deserted by `politicised' artists. I resist 
also the nihilistic necessity of a world apparently `futurised' into
`terminal concussive stability' - the repeated insistence on it,
however elegantly put by Jean Baudrillard and others, has, like all
the preceding images of powerlessness - `repressive tolerance',
`reproducing bourgeois ideology', spectator suture', `the lack' -
 become tedious, dull, even comfortable. I do however, affirm the
calm sense of entailment, the extremity of refusal, the implacable
criticism of self and others which crosses part of Ted's text cited
above, but is perhaps best expressed in the logical shifts of the
following:

  What grounds contemporary aesthetics is catastrophically empty.
  Our emotivist culture is the final occidental act. It is the ground
  of a groundless aesthetics. The aesthete's grounds are instrumental
  and managerial. The power of the aesthetic manager hides his
  emptiness. Misrepresentations of the mechanism of his aesthetics
  imposes necessity on that mechanism, the mechanism makes necessity
  of the misrepresentation.

  Those who long for a non-decadent aesthetics, a non-decadent art
  do their longing in images of their arbitrary power. The longings
  are themselves decadent. This gives us something to do. But we are
  bound to use these resources and their products and to make nothing
  of them. Those resources of which we do not, perhaps, make nothing
  are little better than nothing themselves. There is no anger in
  this remark. Only a sense of necessity and scarcity.

This is from `Art and Language paints a picture - a fragment'
(1983:7), written to accompany paintings `by mouth', like the
studio picture in the Fifth Biennale of Sydney, itself a history
painting of the past decade or so (plate l) better, a surface
offered for marking, for tracing, by disputes about what might
constitute that history, an invitation / refusal, viciously
mocking, of course, Courbet's famous The Studio, the Seven Years
of My Life as a Painter and its legacy as a reference in recent art
historical debate. This implicates us all.

`Only a sense of necessity and scarcity' - such an extremity of
critical watchfulness is one marker I wish to place as the
irreducible value of any avant-garde worth the name, as impossible
to disperse. Such a positioning is, I submit, the only defensible
mode of reflexive work. It is not necessarily modernist, although
in this century it cannot but have some relationship to the modern,
however contingent.

The other marker is quite Other, originating separately from any
of the artistic modernities which are themselves, in important ways
complex effects of it. By the term `modernity' I refer to a social
regime, a network of contingencies, set in play by and within the
Capitalist Machine. These regimes can form on a variety of levels,
across a variety of sites: for example, the economic and cultural
`modernisation' of certain Third World countries. There already
exists a usage of the term `modernity' in the discourses of art,
literature and fashion: since Baudelaire, it has conjured up the
social changes making up `modern life' - the bourgeois city, its
speed, pleasures, volatility, its release of artistic autonomy, its
insistences on the pure pleasures of perception. `Modernity', in
these terms, posited both a content for significant art, and
specific values in its making - Manet was the exemplary figure. A
twentieth-century usage, however, has to be a much expanded affair
- indeed, qualitatively different, because it must be located
within psycho-social spaces increasingly structured by desires
shaped in imaged form, especially visual imagery. Organising this
imagery became more and more essential to the modernisation of
capitalism. The imagery of modernity was no longer a `popular
culture' reservoir into which artists may or may not choose to dip.
It fast became a productive regime with its own mechanisms of
disruption, reduction and dispersal, entangling artists in a
variety of ways.


	<h> Detroit Desiring Machines </h>
	

My research (Smith 1985) has focussed around one moment in the
development of this regime: the period between the wars when, in
the United States especially, new corporations joined the welfare
state to normalise an advanced social regime around various figures
of the modern. Three couplets constantly occur in all forms of
visual imagery: industry-worker, city-crowd, and product-consumer.
My study traces one trajectory through the invention of line
production at the Ford Motor Company plant at Highland Park,
Detroit, 1913-14, to the New York World's Fair, 1939-40. From the
factory to the spectacle, a very diverse imagery of modernity works
with and through other social forces in the prodigious efforts of
the New Corporatism to separate production from consumption, and
to accelerate, simplify and regulate both. Yet this occurs always
in quite specific ways, only one of which I have space to indicate
here: Ford Company line production engenders a radically functional
architecture, creating new `cities' of industry; these plants are
projected as Modern America through business and mass
advertisement, using especially an imagery created by hiring the
most `advanced' modernist painters and photographers, such as
Charles Sheeler and Margaret Bourke-White. Modernism meets
modernity...and gets a job.

In June 1984 a painting by Charles Sheeler, Classic Landscape,
(plate 2) was bought by a consortium of New York art dealers for
US$1.87 million, nearly matching the record price for a twentieth-
century American painting - the US $2 million paid by the
Australian National Gallery for Jackson Pollock's Blue Poles ten
years earlier. The painting had been in the collection of Mrs
Eleanor Ford ever since her husband, Edsel, bought it from its
first exhibition in Detroit in 1932. It was painted in 1931 and was
based on photographs taken by the artist in September and October
of*if 1927, when he spent six weeks at the Ford Motor Company, 
River Rouge Plant, Dearborn, Michigan, under commission by an 
advertising agency to provide images for their campaign for 
the Model A Ford car, launched in December that year.

Fifteen million Model T Fords had been sold since 1908. Their
massive output resulted from a transitionally productive strategy:
engineering of this product was frozen, and all of the inventive
energies were concentrated on reducing (boiling down) the sequences
of supply into ever-smaller segments, obsessively increasing
internal limits. Thus was created a flow of assembly; each minute
part of work, including the movement of stock, the actions of each
worker was minuted, surveyed, recorded, coerced. This was the
Fordism, so readily extended out of the plant to organise the lives
of Ford workers and the surrounding city, which Gramsci (1971:277-
318) attacks.

Part of the Ford Co. domain of invention was the tight enveloping
of these flows by an architecture - such as Kahn's Building B 1917
at the Rouge plant - a functionalist fitting far tighter than that
of the much-heralded European Modern Masters (indeed, its
architecture was invisible to them: they read it as spontaneous,
`vernacular' design, proto-architecture, modern primitivism).
Buildings like this were shaped by both internal and external
movement: the six-storey building of 1914 at Highland Park was
essentially a storage shed for incoming parts assembled over a
railway and structured according to the tracking of cranes. The
entire plant was organised around the through movement of ships 
bringing new materials, railways bringing some manufactured parts, 
then the assembly, then dispersing of the single product. 


</sample>
