<sample>
	<id> J73 </id>
	


	<note>2005 words </note>
	


	<source> Surfaces and their protection  </source>
	


	<bl> ed. C D Kimpton </bl>
	


	<h> Corrosion Protection by Coatings </h>
	


	<bl> by Dr P.N. Richards, General Manager, Research and Technology Centre, BHP
Coated Products Division </bl>
	


	<bl> presented by Mr L.G. Gore, General Manager, Development and Planning, BHP
Coated Products Division </bl>
	

The art and science of preserving the aesthetic and monetary value of articles
by surface coatings to prevent corrosion has paralleled the history of
metallurgy with earliest examples dating from around 3000 BC.

  Gilding by burnishing gold leaf to a heated base appears to have been
the earliest practice but towards Roman times, amalgam gilding became the
art form. This required the base metal to be thoroughly cleaned; recommended
was a &quot; ... dip article into an acid solution prepared from dried unripe
apricots ...&quot;.

  The article was then rubbed with mercury to produce a surface amalgam
to which the gold leaf was applied and the mercury was finally distilled
off by heating leaving the gilded article.

  Tin coatings were used for decorative purposes from at*a least Roman times
but tinning of iron appears much later - about the 12th century AD when
it was widely practised in Europe. The art was not established in Britain
till around 1740 at Pontypool in Wales; this was about 100 years before
the development of zinc galvanizing, again in Wales around 1837. The latter
process was initially known popularly as zinc tinning from which was derived
the concept of the &quot;old tin shed&quot;.

  Two important aspects follow which were established in the early
developments:
  ‚2surfaces to be coated have to be very clean to obtain a bond;
  ‚2for coating with molten metal, some alloying between base and coating
    is necessary to obtain satisfactory surface coating.

  Quite extensive alloy growth at the coating/base interface can occur and
this is often detrimental to mechanical properties. However, in many cases
its thickness can be controlled by the addition of a third element. For
example, in the production of aluminized steel sheets for various heat
applications, 3 per cent Si is added to the Al to control the thickness
of the Fe/Al interface.

  Similarly when steel is dipped into molten zinc at 450°C, a series of
brittle intermetallic layers may form at the interface which may lead to
coating detachment on bending. As practised now on all modern galvanizing
lines, these alloy layers are controlled by the addition of a small amount
of Al (0.2%) to the zinc bath, converting the thick Zn-Fe alloys at the
interface to a thin Zn-Fe-Al layer.

  Because of the great commercial importance of steel based products, it
is intended to concentrate today on mainly metallic protective coatings
on steel. There are few manufacturing industries in which Australia is one
of the biggest and best - this is one - our 1.5 million tonnes a year sheet
coating capacity is exceeded by few countries.

  In Australia today, 70 per cent of all sheet steel products are coated
for protection, with every indication that this will increase as more proteted
panels are used in automobiles. We use about 70Kg per capita per year in
Australia, which is amongst the highest in the world.

  Metallic coatings are classifiable into three types: barrier, cathodic
or anodic:

  
	<note> List </note>
	


	<h> Vitreous enamelling </h>
	
Enamelling is the science of using fused frits to cover the article with
a clear or coloured glass-like coating which protects the base only so long
as it covers it completely. It has been used extensively for domestic
appliances such as baths and stove fronts. In certain applications (e.g.
stove tops, ovens), enamelling has no rival process. Costs have been reduced
by new techniques such as pickle-free enamels, electrostatic dry power
application of the frits, and two-coat/one-fire systems. However, enamelling
still remains a fairly expensive coating method compared to metallic or
organic coatings.


	<h> Metallic coatings </h>
	
A cathodic coating is essentially a protective barrier in which case the
base steel should be completely covered, as for example, for tin cans exposed
to the atmosphere. Any small pinholes in the cathodic metal coating can
lead to pitting of the steel substrate and this is normally avoided by using
thicker coatings.

  Anodic coatings protect the steel base by electrochemical action, the
anodic coating corroding slowly and protecting the cathodic steel (sacrificial
protection). Unlike cathodic metal coatings, any pinholes in an anodic metal
coating will not lead to pitting of the steel substrate due to the sacrificial
action of the anodic metal coating.

  Most anodic metal coatings on steel are based on zinc because it is more
electronegative than iron and with the two in contact, the zinc will corrode
sacrificially and protect the steel from rusting.

  Where zinc is exposed without concurrent exposure of steel, such as the
broad areas of galvanized steel roofing, the zinc forms a protective film
of zinc hydroxide through an anodic reaction with moisture. The hydroxide
inhibits the electron flow and stifles the cathodic reaction and thus the
extent of corrosion or loss of zinc.

  The addition to zinc of small quantities of elements such as Al, Ni, Co,
Cu and Mg promotes a more stable hydroxide and thus reduces the corrosion
rate of zinc.


	<h> Galvanising </h>
	
Zinc coating of steel to protect against corrosion is the most widely used
corrosion protection. The well known corrugated iron was first produced
using steam power in 1854 and the product was soon in great demand as roofing
and cladding due to the combination of a strong, ductile base and a bright
corrosion resistant coating.

  Modern galvanized sheet products are produced on continuous process lines
at speeds of up to 200 m/min. or more giving annual production in excess
of 250,000 tonnes per line.

  Cold reduced steel strip is softened by annealing in line with the coating
pot where the coating mass of zinc on the strip is controlled by a locally
developed automatic system involving air jets or knives placed each side
of the strip. BHP's five lines have vertical heating and precleaning furnaces
unlike many overseas lines which tend to be essentially horizontal furnaces.

  The exposure life of galvanized steel is directly proportional to the
thickness of the zinc coating and a range of coating thicknesses from 100
to 500 g/m2 is produced to cover the commercial variety of end use. For
example, 100 g/m2 coatings are used for mild structural steel applications
(purlins, girts), 275 g/m2 coatings for prepainted roofing and walling
applications, 450 g/m2 coatings for roofing applications; and 600 g/m2 
coatings for water tanks and culverts.

  Exposure life is also related to environmental conditions, severe marine
exposure resulting in the most rapid corrosion rate.

  Modern continuous galvanizing lines such as BHP's with their high capacity,
high capital cost and technology intensity are beyond the means of many
developing nations, so we invented and developed the unique Lysaght
Mini-Galvanizing Process to produce top quality continuously galvanized
coil for annual production of less than about 80,000 tonnes. The process
is patented in 44 countries and is operating very successfully in Malaysia
(2), Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines and will soon be operating
in India.


	<h> ZINCALUME </h>
	
The most important coating development in three decades was inspired by
pioneering work by Bethlehem Steel who showed the superior corrosion resistance
of a 55% Al, 43.5% Zn plus Si alloy compared with zinc, particularly in
marine atmospheres, an environment that has traditionally been very severe
on galvanized steel. John Lysaght (Australia) Limited, became the first
licensee of this process and further successful patented processing and
marketing developments by Lysaght led to an arrangement whereby the process
is now jointly promoted and marketed by Bethlehem International Engineering
Corp. and Lysaght.

  Although production costs of galvanized and ZINCALUME are similar, the
life expectancy of ZINCALUME is greater, with a slower corrosion than
galvanized, while still sacrificially protecting steel. 50 g/m2 coating
is used for dry interior applications, general manufacturing and appliances;
150 g/m2 coating is used for prepainted roofing and walling; 200 g/m2 coating
is used for roofing and walling where added corrosion resistance is required,
and for ZINCALUME rainwater tanks.

  Since 1976, BHP has produced over 2.7 million tonnes, about equal to the
rest of the world put together by the now 18 licensees world wide.
  
  The corrosion rate of ZINCALUME is much lower than zinc in most exposure
conditions.

  This unique coating contains 2 phases - an Al-rich continuous phase
comprising about 80 per cent of the coating volume, together with a zinc-rich
phase and a very thin quaternary Fe-Al-Zn-Si compound at the coating-steel
interface.

  ZINCALUME is predominantly used in the building industry where its excellent
corrosion properties under conditions of atmospheric exposure are an obvious
advantage. ZINCALUME also performs well in rainwater goods. It is expanding
in its applications including heat reflective applications and heat cum
corrosion resistance.

Protection of automotive panels
In the last decade, largely in America, the automotive industry has been
concerned with providing body panels that will not show rust within a
reasonable time, particularly in conditions where salt is used to disperse
snow on roads.

  Corrosion in cars is mainly of three types:

  ‚2cosmetic, on outer surfaces where paint has been chipped
  ‚2Inside-out where it begins on the inside of panels due to an accumulation
    of dust and moisture and where it remains damp for long periods, typically
    rocker panels and door outers.
  ‚2dissimilar metal corrosion.

  Coatings for body panels are generally either:

  ‚2electroplated zinc or zinc alloy coating, or

  ‚2a zinc-rich paint system known as Zincrometal, which is a two-layered
    composite of epoxy resin/inhibitor and metallic zinc powder, the latter
    added to provide sacrificial protection of the steel. Zincrometal is
    a product from continuous paint lines and improved versions of the original
    product are now available.

  Zincrometal is used for 35 per cent of protected panels in the United States
but will be displaced by electrogalvanised.

  Of our domestic steel shipments to local car manufacturers, 18 per cent
is Zincrometal with a total of 21 per cent being coated product.

  For electroplating sheets, horizontal cells, vertical cells or radial
cells are utilized with either sulphate or chloride solutions and consumable
(zinc) anodes or non-consumable anodes. They can be arranged for plating
one or both surfaces of the strip.

  The consumer demand for more corrosion resistant vehicles has resulted
in Canadian legislation for vehicles built after 1981 of no outer panel
corrosion after 1.5 years or 60,000 Km, and no outer panel perforation after
five years or 200,000 Km. Other countries are likely to follow this pattern.
Cars will last longer and have better resale value.

  While straight zinc appears to be the most favoured electroplate for autobody
sheet in the USA, various alloy coatings such as Zn-Fe or Zn-Ni are being
promoted vigorously, particularly in Japan. Among the new coatings being
developed overseas are two layer coatings having a thin high Fe-Zn surface
layer to promote better paintability.


	<h> Tinplate and tin-free steel </h>
	
Tinning of iron and steel is probably the oldest example of commercial corrosion
protection and is now used most widely in food containers. The coating on
tinplate is made up of four distinct components:
  
	<note> list </note>
	

  The three innermost layers define the corrosion behaviour of the composite
under the many varied conditions found particularly in food packaging. Under
normal atmospheric aerobic conditions the tin coating acts as a cathodic
barrier type coating, enhanced by the chromium oxide passivating layer.
Under anaerobic and mildly acid conditions tin acts as a mildly anodic,
i.e., sacrificial, coating as in wet food packs and provides protection
for any exposed base steel. With some very aggressive foodstuffs, tinplate
does not offer sufficient protection and must be supplemented by lacquer
coatings. In other cases, lacquer cannot be used because the presence of
tin in very small amounts is required for taste and appearance.

  Early production of tinplate was by the hot dip process, but electrolytic
tinning is today's process which allows a wide range of tin coating mass
to be applied.

  Heavy coatings up to 15 g/m2 are typical for canning certain aggressive
products, where lacquer coatings are not applicable and these heavy coatings
are used also on utensils in constant repetitive use such as bread baking
dishes. 


</sample>
