<sample>
	<id> J75 </id>
	


	<note> 2010 words </note>
	


	<source> Second International Conference on Bulk Materials Storage, Handling and Transportation - June 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Fine particles and their effect on segregation in bins </h>
	


	<bl> By D.F. Bagster and C. Killalea </bl>
	

SUMMARY   Recent studies of particle segregation involving binary mixtures
with a coarse and very fine component (finer than 100 microns) have produced
a decrease rather than the usual excess of coarse particles at the bin wall
(inverse segregation).

It was aimed to clarify this inverse segregation effect by feeding binary
mixtures with a coarse and very fine component (fly ash or alumina) to a
thin, long sloped container simulating loading into a storage bin. Segregation
profiles (plots of dimensionless coarse particle concentration against
dimensionless distance from the feed point) confirmed the inverse segregation
effect for very fine powder mixes.

It is likely that the conditions needed for inverse segregation are a very
fine particle component (less than 100 microns) and a large coarse to fines
size ratio. There is a dependence on coarse particle concentration. It seems
that inverse segregation will occur at higher coarse feed concentrations
and the overall amount of segregation is reduced if the fine component is
reduced in size.


	<h>1   INTRODUCTION </h>
	

Segregation is an unmixing process on solids, producing separation or
classification of solids. It refers to the separation of coarse from fine
material during the flow of a powder or the vibration of a bed of powder.
As an example, gravel, coal or sand tend to form a cone shaped pile when
poured on the ground. When this pile contains many different sizes, the
smallest ones remain at the apex of the cone, and the large particles tend
to come to rest at the bottom edge. The phenomenon affects industries with
solids handling and storage systems.

For instance, the quality of finished glass is affected by segregation.
Also the uneven distribution of size in a coal feed of a preparation plant
results in inefficient operation. Another occurrence is the reaction of
a bed of powder with a gas which often depends on the size of the particles
and the pattern of gas flow with the result that a non-uniform distribution
of sizes can adversely affect the speed or conversion of reaction. Uneven
loading on bunker walls could conceivably lead to failure of the structure.

One of the aspects of particle segregation that has confused its understanding
is the behaviour of very fine material (100 microns and much less) when
in a mixture with coarser particles. Initially, when this was first addressed
in the literature, for instance Van Denburg and Bauer (1964) and Williams
(1965), it was considered that fine particles would give negligible
segregation. Lawrence and Beddow (1969) noticed inverse segregation (less
coarse particles in outer layers) in mixes containing greater than 60 per
cent fines, with large coarse particles. This appears to be the first published
work reporting this phenomenon. Williams (1976) reported that one problem
of segregation not studied is the extent to which segregation occurs for
particles of mean size less than 100 microns. Drahun and Bridgewater (1983)
could not clearly find the reasons for Lawrence and Beddow's phenomenon.
Bagster (1983) reported reverse segregation patterns for low coarse
concentration, fine sand mixtures (the coarse concentration falls as the
distance from the feed point increases). He ascribed this to cohesion effects.
Bagster (1985) again reported these reverse segregation patterns, and such
influences as settling velocities, bouncing fine particles, &quot;quasi-particle&quot;
formation, cohesion, and matrix of fines effects were considered. The
literature review contains more details.

Indeed the literature is scarce which considered the problem of segregation
involving very fine material, both from reporting of results and in
interpretation of results. The object of this paper is to investigate the
segregation patterns obtained from binary mixtures of particles involving
very fine powers. As discussed below, size of particles is considered by
authors and researchers to be more influential on segregation than density,
and was the basis of this study.


	<h>2   LITERATURE REVIEW </h>
	

Fischer (1960) looked at the problem of blending coarse and fine particles,
and came up with some suggested segregation mechanisms. These included that
larger particles gained their mobility by rolling and flowing over one another
and smaller particles achieve their mobility more by aerated suspension,
with fine material being like dust in air. Another factor that can come
into play is a tendency of small particles to coat the large ones, upsetting
the random distribution mechanism. Electrostatic charges on the surface
of particles constitute another most powerful force. The relatively small
electrostatic charges that can exist on solid particles can produce
segregation.

Williams (1963) suggested that particle size is the most important of the
properties causing segregation. The author said that size segregation occurs
when a powder is poured into a heap, whereby the larger particles run more
easily down the slope of the heap, and also when a mixture is subjected
to vibration. This vibratory effect he refers to as &quot;percolation&quot;, whereby
larger particles tend to rise to the top, and demonstrated this effect by
immersing a large steel ball into sand and observing that on vibration the
steel ball tended to rise.

Van Denburg and Bauer (1964) reported the caracteristics of solids that
they consider to affect solid-solid mixing. These were: grain size
distribution, nominal grain size, particle shape, effective particle density,
surface characteristics, surface conductivity, bulk density, flowability,
angle of repose, and resistance to agglomeration. This list is similar to
Brown's factors (1939) contributing to segregation, and like Williams (1963),
the authors consider that for free-flowing solids, size and distribution
of size are the most influential.

They said that electrostatic effects produce an unmixing effect by creating
agglomeration when particles are extremely fine and of high surface area.
But also, they claim that segregation within a storage container is
predominantly caused by the freedom of particle movement that exists when
granular, free flowing materials tumble over each other.

The conclusion stated is that finely sized materials, say finer than 200
mesh (74 microns), will offer few problems in segregation. This is because
here the variables associated with high surface area per unit weight tend
to control and free flowing properties are often lost.

Williams (1965), following up his earlier work, again added that size was
the most important property influencing segregation. He explained the
segregation effect with a &quot;screening&quot; model.

The inclined surface contains holes of the same order of size as the diameter
of the bigger particles. Particles when falling down a slope are kept in
a state of agitation near the surface, and act as a screen, which allows
fine particles to fall through with high probability. Coarse particles can
not pass through and roll to the lower part of the inclined slope. This
differs from Brown's collision theory (1939) in explaining segregation where
it is postulated that smaller particles are brought to rest on collision
much more readily than large ones which therefore can travel further.

Williams also states that very fine particles are usually cohesive, and
that segregation is very much less serious for such powders. He said that
it is quite certain that the tendency to segregate falls away with reduced
particle size, and is negligible for particles less than about 20 microns.
No numerical data supported this claim, which is similar to Van Denburg
and Bauer's view.

Lawrence and Beddow (1969) studied powder segregation during die filling
with two component mixes of lead particles. Their main conclusions were:

2.1  Segregation occurs by fines filtering down through the moving powder
mass, and an excess of coarse particles flows to the outer layers of the
powder in the die. They termed this occurrence normal segregation.

2.2  As fines are reduced in size, beyond a critical value, the filtering
process becomes progressively more difficult, and segregation may even
decrease. In large sized coarse particle systems, inverse segregation occurs.
Also, particle shape and density had little effect upon powder segregation.

Hence Lawrence and Beddow observed that with large coarse particles and
a high percentage of fines in the system, the outer layers would have a
lower coarse particle percentage than in the original mixture. They attribute
this inverse segregation, as they called it, to the fact that when burial
occurs during die filling, the relatively few coarse particles are hindered
by drag from reaching the vicinity of the die wall. They said this occurred
in mixes containing more than 60% fines. With less fines they observed normal
segregation occurring. Harris and Hildon (1970) noted that few quantitative
measurements of the segregation process had been made, and that size was
reported to be the biggest influence. They stated that segregation was induced
by two main methods. These were segregation by vibration, whereby fine 
particles percolate through the interstices in the bed of coarse particles, 
and segregation induced by pouring into a heap as demonstrated by Williams 
(1965). 

Shinohara et al (1972) theoretically analysed the mechanisms of size
segregation of particles in filling a hopper based on the screening or
percolation model. According to their model when mixed particles of different
size flow down on a solids heaped surface, the fines pass through interspaces
of larger particles, and are packed in interspaces of stationary large
particles of the heaped surfaces. With this, and in the derivations of their
equations, voidage in the bed of particles is considered a factor contributing
to the segregation process.

Williams and Khan (1973) summarized the main mechanisms of size segregation.
The first considered was trajectory segregation, due to the fact that for
particles projected horizontally, the distance they will travel is proportional
to the square of the particle diameter. Percolation, which is when
rearrangement of particles takes place due to the probability that a particle
will find a void in which to fall, which depends on particle size, and
vibration, in which large particles vibrated tend to rise to the surface,
are other mechanisms stated.

Their experiments examined the effects of particle size and shape on
segregation. Shape was considered not to be a significant contributor to
segregation but particle size, as with others, was the main factor.

Another finding was that segregation was reduced when the mean diameter
of components was decreased below 500 microns. Also in glassbead mixtures,
by increasing the diameter ratio past a critical point, segregation was
reduced. This was attributed to the presence of static electricity in finer
materials, causing cohesion between particles, and reducing percolation.

Williams (1976) presented a review of the segregation of particulate
materials. In this paper, it is recognised that a problem not studied is
the extent to which segregation occurs for particles of mean size less than
100 microns, and the particle size for which segregation can be assumed
to be negligible.

In 1983 Bagster confirmed Drahun and Bridgewater's finding (1983) that
concentration profiles for various slope lengths could be correlated using
a fractional (dimensionless) slope length. Also, at low feed concentrations
of coarse particles, the *the profiles could be correlated using a
concentration ratio. This ratio relates the coarse concentration at a
particular slope length to the average feed coarse concentration.

For coarse sand and cohesionless fines mixtures, the characteristic increase
of concentration of coarse material towards the wall was reported by Bagster.
He observed an apparent universality of concentration profile at low coarse
concentrations. This is consistent with there being no interference between
coarse particles. However, with higher feed coarse concentrations, there
is a probable concentration dependence.

Also presented were profiles for low coarse concentrations and very fine
sand particles, finer than before, with the fines being somewhat cohesive.
The reversal of previously found profiles was observed, with a pronounced
reduction in coarse particle concentration near the wall of the bin. That
is, the coarse portion of the feed has seemingly been retarded as it travelled
down the slope. As the coarse concentration was increased to 25 per cent
the coarse concentration profile showed less extremities of concentration
variation at the bin walls. At 50 per cent concentration the reverse profile
did not really show up at all, and there was on the whole a flattened profile,
indicating little segregation. Thus the author stated that the reverse profile
is modified by the simple mass of additional coarse material.


</sample>
