By R.W. Simpson, G. Miles, J.A. Taylor, K.A. Verrall & J.P. Woodland 5.  The application of the hybrid model  

        The CRES model is referred to as a hybrid model as it
combines a deterministic model with a statistical model (eg see
Jakeman, Simpson and Taylor, 1986). It is clear from the
previous section that the appropriate statistical distribution
to be assumed for Brisbane TSP concentrations in step (a) of
the hybrid modelling methodology outlined in Section 3 is the
2-parameter lognormal distribution. Step (b) of the method
requires the use of a deterministic model. The work of Simpson
and Jakeman (1984) and Jakeman and Taylor (1985) in Newcastle
(New South Wales, Australia) indicates that a simple empirical
relationship exists between the wind speed percentiles and the
air pollution concentration percentiles of the form

  

where    and    are the wind speed (lOO-p) - and pollution
concentration p - percentiles, respectively, and K is a
constant for the range of percentiles considered. Equation (6)
leads to an expression for K of the form

  

        This empirical model can be validated by examining the
behaviour of K given in equation (7). If the derived values of
K for most percentiles are constant then the model is
applicable. An example of such a test is shown in Fig 2 for the
Hamilton monitoring site where clearly K is constant for most
percentiles. The use of this model considerably simplifies the
problem of predicting the pollution distributions.

        This simplification follows from the use of equation (5) to
calculate    or maximum likelihood methods, and then
substituting for the pollution percentiles using equation (6).
For example, with the fractile method this leads to an
expression for    of

  

That is, the calculation of    may be derived simply from the
wind speed data. Given    the estimate of the maximum follows
directly from equation (4) provided the geometric mean can be
calculated. If we assume it is a relatively straightforward
matter to construct an air pollution model to predict the
annual arithmetic mean then the geometric mean may be
calculated from such a prediction using the ?-value derived
from wind speed data (eg from equation (8)) in equation (2).
Therefore the emission scenario in the air pollution model used
to predict the annual arithmetic mean TSP level may be linked
to estimates of both the annual geometric mean and maximum TSP
levels, and these in turn may be compared to the health
standards. In this way an annual average emissions scenario for
Brisbane may be tested for violations of both short and long
term health standards.

        The central problem with this method is devising a
technique for estimating B using wind speed data. The
simple fractile method may be used as set out in equation (8).
In this case the problem is deciding upon a suitable range of
percentiles. However the work of Jakeman, Taylor and Simpson
(1986) suggest that maximum likelihood methods may be the most
appropriate, so equation (6) must be used to estimate a range
of pollution percentiles. Once again the problem is to choose
an appropriate range of percentiles to which to apply the model
in equation (6), a percentile range which in turn defines K.

        In the Newcastle study, Simpson and Jakeman (1984) used the
fractile method and Jakeman and Taylor (1985) used maximum
likelihood methods. The Bureau data set used in that study was
of the same standard form as the airport data set in Brisbane,
and these data sets are only accurate for estimates of high to
medium wind speeds given that their primary purpose is to
measure high airport winds. Therefore we use the 50- to 90-
percentile range when using these data, as well as for the DAPC
wind data (although using the middle range, the 30- to 70-
percentile range, for the DAPC data yielded similar results).
These ranges were chosen after examination of the variation of 
K with percentile values. Taylor (1985) has shown that, if    is 
the angle of the straight line fit to data such as that shown in 
Fig 2, when the absolute magnitude of    is greater than 0.0005 
radians the errors in using the model in equation (6) became 
significant. With such a stringent requirement on the constancy 
of K, the percentile range must be chosen with care. Clearly the
variation in K over the 10- to 90-percentile range shown in
Fig. 2 would lead to    values above 0.0005 radians so 
much of the error in the method is due to the assumption in 
equation (6). The results for the Hamilton site shown in Table 
7 still show an agreement to within a factor of 2 with the 
expected values.

        A measure of the accuracy of using the fractile formula in
equation (8) can be seen by examining Table 6 where estimates
of    derived from this equation are compared with the values derived
from the raw TSP data. The results using the maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) method are also shown. The use of the MLE
method requires the specification of K which, following Simpson
and Jakeman (1984) and Jakeman and Taylor (1985), was
calculated using the 50-percentile values in equation (7). The
K-values differ significantly from site to site but the
B-values derived from the MLE method were the same, a result
that could be expected from the form of equation (8).

        The results of Table 6 indicate that the empirical model in
equation (6) yields reasonable estimates of the mean ?-value
for TSP sites in Brisbane when Bureau wind speed data are used.
Jakeman and Taylor (1985) likewise found that the model yielded
good results using Bureau wind speed data in Newcastle similar
to that in Brisbane. However the ?-value is consistently
consistently underpredicts this value when DAPC wind speed data
are used. There may be a number of reasons for this result. The
Bureau data gathering network is designed to estimate the high
wind speeds and are in airport sites relatively free of
building effects so a higher geometric standard deviation could
be expected in these results than at the DAPC sites. On the
other hand the geometric standard deviations of the raw TSP
data would include variations in both emissions and meteorology
throughout the year while the estimates using equation (6) only
include the variability of wind speed data. It is notable that
the ?-values for the TSP data at the industrial sites are the
highest. However the nephelometer results also shown in Table
4 are consistently high and comparable at two light
industry/commercial sites. It is also notable that the Bureau
?-values are usually higher than 1.51 while the DAPC results
are always lower than 1.51, so the Bureau results
predict possible violations of the maximum standard without
violations of the geometric mean standard whereas the DAPC
results predict the reverse. Another possible explanation for
the differences between the DAPC and Bureau data sets is the
method of measurement. There is no information available for
a comparison of the accuracy of the manual recording methods
used for the collection of the Bureau data with the continuous
dataloging at the DAPC sites but it is possible to test the
errors in collecting measurements every 3 hours. Consequently
estimates of    were carried out using DAPC data corresponding
to the 8 collection periods per day used by the Bureau of
Meteorology and we found negligible differences between these
estimates and those derived from the full data sets. All the
calculations shown here (eg in Table 6) using the DAPC wind
speed data derive from these shortened data sets.

        The results derived using equation (6) to predict maximum
concentrations from equation (3) are shown in Table 7. The
observed values of the geometric mean are used in equation
(3) and B is estimated by the MLE method. Given that the TSP
data are collected at best every six days, we include the
estimate of the maximum value,    derived by assuming a
lognormal distribution for the TSP data and using maximum
likelihood estimates of    and    computed from the raw TSP data.
The model estimates,    should be compared with these values.
The 95% confidence intervals are included for the predictions. The
agreement between the model predictions and the expected
maximum levels is usually to within a factor of 2, an example
of which is shown in Fig 3 for the Rocklea results. The airport
Bureau model predictions are usually higher than those derived
from the DAPC wind data, as expected from Table 6, but the
differences are often not large. The worst results are the
nephelometer predictions which usually are significantly lower
than those expected.

        In Table 7 both the estimates of the maximum derived from the
raw particulate data and those predicted from the hybrid model assume 
lognormality for the statistical distribution of the particulate 
concentrations, an assumption which is usually correct, given the 
results shown in Table 5, but not always. A measure of the inaccuracy 
introduced by this assumption can be gauged from Table 8 which compares
observations Of the 98-percentile particulate concentration
value with those estimates derived by assuming lognormality for
the raw data. It is clear from these results that the
assumption of lognormality yields good agreement with the
observed data.

        The differences between model predictions and raw data
estimates shown in Table 7 arise in the calculation of    as
the geometric mean is assumed to be given in the methods used
to estimate K and the maximum concentration; that is, the
differences arise in the factor,    on the right hand side
of equation (4). The results indicate that using only wind
speed data to estimate this factor accounts for much of the
concentration fluctuations and leads to estimates of the
relative magnitude of the maximum particulate value to the
geometric mean which are accurate to a factor of 2, an error
quite acceptable in air pollution modelling (eg see Hanna,
1982; Simpson and Hanna, 1981). Since fluctuations in
emissions are necessarily ignored (such information is rarely
available) the model used generally underpredicts the maximum
so the methodology outlined here yields a lower limit to the
expected outcome and therefore the subsequent predictions of
the controls on emissions can be regarded as conservative.

 6.        Worst case scenario air quality management  

        In the previous section we established that a hybrid model
could be used to estimate the ratio of the maximum particulate
concentration to the geometric mean. We tested the model on the
six years of particulate concentration and meteorological data
available for the period 1979 to 1984. In principle therefore
we can construct a standard air pollution model to estimate the
annual arithmetic mean using meteorological data and annual
average emissions data, use wind speed data to estimate the
geometric mean (using equation (2)), and then estimate the
maximum particulate level using equation (3). An air pollution
control strategy based on average annual emissions can then be
devised to avoid violations of both geometric mean and maximum
TSP health standards. From the previous section it is clear
that it would not be uncommon for such a strategy to require
that the geometric mean TSP level be substantially below the
health standard so that the maximum TSP standard not be
violated. Given this situation, the question then arises as to
what is the lowest level for the geometric mean TSP concentration 
which ensures the maximum TSP standard is never violated. Clearly
this new `standard' depends on the value of B in equation (4)
which is a measure of the fluctuations in TSP levels throughout
the year. Such fluctuations in turn depend on fluctuations in
particulate emissions and meteorology. It is improbable that
emission fluctuations can be adequately predicted so of
necessity we have only discussed controls on annual average
emissions. However the effect of changes in meteorological
fluctuations year to year can be estimated from the annual wind
speed data sets given the success of the hybrid model outlined
in the previous section.  The underlying assumption is that the distributional form representing TSP data does not change as meteorological conditions change.

In Brisbane there are Bureau airport annual wind speed data sets of the type used for the predictions in Tables 6 and 7 available for the 35-year period from 1950 to 1984.

