<sample>
	<id> J80 </id>
	


	<note> 2003 words </note>
	


	<source> The Second National Space Engineering Symposium - Sydney - 25-27 March 1986 </source>
	


	<h> INTELSAT TDMA and its implementation in Australia </h>
	


	<bl> By Stuart Howe </bl>
	


	<h> ABSTRACT </h>
	

  The paper considers the emergence of digital communications through the
complementary processes of innovative research and advancing technology.
INTELSAT's part in the use and development of digital satellite communications
is considered, with emphasis on the TDMA system, which is currently being
introduced into INTELSAT networks. The advantages and economies of using
TDMA over traditional analogue techniques, and other digital methods is
then explored, as a preface to considering some of the difficulties encountered
in implementing a TDMA traffic terminal at an existing earth station.


	<h>1. INTRODUCTION </h>
	

  Communication is a basic and growing need of businesses and of the
individual, and demand for flexibility in connectivity of links and provision
of services is definitely not static. This demand, and the technology that
can satisfy it frequently tend to appear as complementary processes, each
aiding the other. However, often is the case that innovative thoughts outstrips
practical technological development, and some years pass before new
communication systems can be realised utilising appropriate and economical
technology.

  A example of this is the emergence of the INTELSAT TDMA network. The
concepts, characteristics, and advantages of the system are detailed, in
addition to noting hurdles encountered and overcome whilst implementing
a TDMA traffic terminal at an Overseas Telecommunications Commission (OTC)
earth station in Ceduna, South Australia.
  
  The emphasis throughout the paper is that the main thrust behind the
development of these new systems is not merely to exploit new theories,
techniques or methods of manufacture, but to strive to make the most efficient
use of available resources.


	<h>2.  INTELSAT AND DIGITAL SATELLITE SYSTEMS </h>
	

  The International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation, INTELSAT,
is no stranger to the staggering demands of communications systems users,
and to the need for constant investment in development of novel and more
efficient means of utilising both ground and space resources. This is born
out by considering that during the relatively short operational existence
of INTELSAT since 1965, the total number of half-circuits provided has grown
to greater than 100,000, making the consortium the largest worldwide carrier
of international traffic.

  INTELSAT also has significant experience in the provision of digital
satellite communications. Single Channel Per Carrier (SCPC) systems have
for considerable time offered medium rate digital services at 48, 50 and
56 KBit/sec. Other multi-user PSK/FDMA methods, such as INTELSAT's Business
Service (IBS) and Intermediate Data Rate (IDR) carriers allow digital
transmissions at up to 44 MBit/sec. In fact, the equipment required for
IBS and IDR operation is considerably simpler and less costly than that
needed for INTELSAT's latest digital satellite system, Time Division Multiple
Access (TDMA). In order to appreciate why a great deal of time and effort
has been expended on the development of TDMA networks, a closer look at
the system is required. 


	<h>3.  INTELSAT TDMA </h>
	


	<h>3.1 History </h>
	

  The introduction of TDMA systems into the global communications network
is a good case where advancing technology, and the development of requirements
for a workable system tended to complement each other. It was in the mid-60's,
very early in the satellite communications era, when an experiment between
America and Britain was set up to investigate timing considerations for
satellite multiple-access digital carriers [Schmidt et al, 1969]. It wasn't
until the end of the decade that very primitive TDMA equipment was tested
between Australia, Hawaii, and Japan, and then four more years before a
prototype TDMA equipment specification was produced [INTELSAT, 1974].

  Throughout the late '70's, in field trials using &quot;2nd generation&quot; equipment,
experiments using live traffic were carried out [INTELSAT, 1979]. These
indicated that increased reliability and reduced cost of traffic stations
could be achieved if all network control and timing functions were concentrated
into specialist stations. The result of the field trials was the production
by INTELSAT of a refined TDMA specification in 1980 [INTELSAT, 1980], which
was followed in 1983 by a revision, to which the network today runs [INTELSAT,
1983].


	<h>3.2 General System Concepts </h>
	

  Under the TDMA mode of operation, each participating station in the network
transmits, in turn, a digitally-modulated &quot;burst&quot; of traffic. The basic
time interval over which this cyclic sequence is repeated is the TDMA &quot;frame&quot;,
and during this time each station will transmit one or more bursts, and
receive one or more bursts from its correspondents. The exact length*lenth
of the bursts, their position within the frame, and destination of traffic,
is laid down in a predetermined Burst Time Plan (BTP).

  Obviously, in a system where carriers from a number of geographically
widely-separated earth stations must be co-ordinated to arrive at the satellite
at precise times relative to one another, there has to be a common network
timing source. The TDMA system provides specialist stations, alluded to
above, which solely transmit bursts containing network timing and control
information, and which allow all traffic stations to establish frame timing,
and hence relate their transmissions to a common reliable timing source.
The stations are referred to as reference stations, and the bursts, reference
bursts. The TDMA specification [INTELSAT, 1983] describes the network as
having four reference stations per satellite. Figure 1 shows the typical
coverage areas of a satellite carrying TDMA traffic; an east and a west
hemisphere beam, and east and west zone beams (usually contained within
the hemisphere beams) of opposite polarisation. Two reference stations (a
primary and a secondary) located in each of the zone beams can thus provide
redundant monitoring and control for the entire network.

  In many ways TDMA, or PCM/QPSK/TDMA, can be thought of as the digital (time
domain) counterpart of the well-known analogue (frequency domain) FDM/FM/FDMA
system. Carriers, of fixed bandwidth and separated in frequency by guard
bands, within a transponder in the FDMA system appear as bursts, of fixed
length and separated by guard times, within a frame in the TDMA system.
Figure 2 shows the basic TDMA frame, with traffic and reference bursts,
and also shows a typical FDMA transponder configuration, for comparison.
In fact, the basic TDMA system carries approximately the same number of
channels, per frame, as FDMA systems could carry in the same transponder
under single carrier conditions. Where, then, are the advantages of TDMA?


	<h>3.3 System Benefits </h>
	

  The most basic advantage*advanatage TDMA offers is the method of satellite
access. The transmit powers of multiple FDMA carries in a single transponder
must be reduced from the maximum (&quot;backed-off&quot;) so as to avoid driving the
satellite amplifying travelling wave tube (TWT) into saturation, or non-linear
operation, and causing intermodulation products (IMPs) between carriers.
This is not a problem with TDMA operation, where there is only ever a single
carrier in the transponder at any one time, avoiding the formation of any
IMPs. The TDMA system thus allows maximum use to be made of the satellite
power resource by operating spacecraft TWTs non-linearly at, or near
saturation. In a practical network, there could be anywhere between five
and twenty users of a single transponder. Multiple FDMA carriers in a
transponder, we have seen, have to be backed-off to avoid IMPs. The more
transponder accesses, the greater the individual back-offs and the more
inefficient the transmission method becomes. The decrease in the number
of channels able to be carried through the transponder thus decreases sharply
with the number of users.

  The TDM network, on the other hand, can cope with any number of users, all
carriers being transmitted at, or near the satellite TWT saturation point.
The only overhead in allowing a greater number of frame accesses, is the
addition of guard time and traffic burst preamble. As this corresponds to
the loss of approximately 5 SCs for each added burst, the fall off in capacity
with users is much less dramatic. Figure 4 shows that an 80% efficiency,
or traffic carrying capability, is still possible even with 50 or more frame
accesses. Thus, a low sensitivity to the number of system users means that
efficient system operation does not restrict access to large volume users
(as FDMA does), or to small (as SCPC does), but handles all burst sizes
equally well.

  A further advantage afforded by the basic TDMA system over its FDMA
counterpart is achieved by the use of a technique called DSI, or digital
speech interpolation. This can effectively increase system capacity for
voice channels, which comprise the majority of satellite traffic, by a factor
of up to 2.5. The technique takes advantage of the fact that during a telephone
conversation, one party is listening not (using his half-circuit) as the
other talks. Considering this, as well as the natural pauses, hesitations,
and intervals in normal speech patterns, an average circuit activity of
only 35 to 40% results.

  If terrestrial channels (TCs), incoming to an earth station, are dynamically
assigned to available satellite channels (SCs) only when active, then
theoretically, over a large number of channels, up to 2.5 or more TCs can
be compressed into one SC. This results in SCs being active for a large
percentage of time and gives a maximum theoretical capacity of the TDMA
frame, utilising DSI, as approximately 2.5 times that of an equivalent FDMA
system in the same transponder. However, despite various overheads in the
TDMA frame, due to reference bursts, traffic burst preambles, channels giving
the dynamic TC-SC assignments, coding of traffic, and special time slots
in the frame (see figure 3), an advantage of a factor of about 2 is still
retained.

  The benefits of using TDMA are not limited to providing increased capacity
either. There is one distinct virtue, related to ground station equipment.
Traditionally with FM/FDMA or PSK/FDMA techniques, for each new overseas
correspondent, extra baseband, modulating, and radio frequency (RF) equipment
is needed. The need may not be as great for transmit equipment (where &quot;multi
destination user&quot; carriers are often used), but is definitely present for
receive equipment.

  A simple TDMA station will include some baseband quipment, burst formatting
and modulating equipment, and RF equipment. Owing to the fact that traffic
is transmitted as short bursts (say 100us duration) every 2ms (the INTELSAT
frame time), the terminal modulating and RF equipment is only operating
for a small percentage of the frame time. Thus, operations can be extended
to a number of new overseas correspondents for the addition of extra baseband
equipment only. This advantage is significant for communications
administrations in smaller countries, for which the cost of providing a
service is of prime importance.


	<h>3.4 The TDMA Traffic Station </h>
	

  TDMA earth station equipment was mentioned briefly above, but it may serve
useful to detail the basic building blocks comprising a traffic terminal.
There are essentially four separate functional blocks: the terrestrial
interface equipment (TIE), baseband equipment, burst formatting and modulating
equipment, and RF gear.

  The TIE is responsible for converting the diverse formats of information
present in terrestrial networks (analogue FDM multiplex stacks, or digital
streams of various speeds and coding) into a standard form acceptable to
the TDMA equipment (2.048MB/S, according to CCITT rec. G.732). The TIE will
obviously differ from station to station. The 2.048 MB/S streams are then
fed to the baseband or (DSI) units, which perform the traffic concentration
function noted previously. It also serves to correct for the small relative
(plesiochronous) drift between the terrestrial clock (if there are digital
terrestrial links) and the TDMA system clock.

  Timing and control of the actions of the TDMA terminal is concentrated
into the central TDMA Terminal Equipment (CTTE). This unit is responsible
for generating the terminal transmit/receive timing, forming the burst
preamble, and coding, scrambling (for energy dispersal) and then modulating
the burst. Additionally, the terminal operator interface is generally part
of the CTTE.

  The RF portion of the terminal consists, as with most other transmission
systems, of up-and-down-converters, and burst-mode carrier control equipment.
The TDMA specification allows for groups of synchronised transponders, all
having identical start-of-frame times. A traffic terminal needing to transmit
to stations in a number of different satellite coverage areas, or with
different signal polarisations, can (by virtue of the burst-mode nature
of carriers) access transponders of different frequency and polarisation
by switching between up-converters, or transmit feeds respectively.


</sample>
