By Janka Abrami  

THE MUCH TALKED about holidays had arrived.
  On the last day of work, just before the break-up Party, I
received my wages with three days extra pay, which was a
pleasant surprise. "That's for Christmas" the boss explained,
when I asked him. He shook my hand warmly and wished me `happy
holidays' but I couldn't think of anything less exciting than
being home with Bronka for two weeks, while Nathan would be at
work.
  "I can't afford to laze for so long" he said a week earlier,
urging his brother to help him find temporary work for the
holidays. "The second instalment for our tickets to Australia
has to be paid and we have to buy a few little things; other
than food."
  "If you'd only start to look for a partner or borrow some money
to start a plumbing business of your own, as you promised, I
would be much happier" I said when we were alone. But Nathan
shrugged his shoulders. "Give me time, Rela."
  Harry talked us into going to the city to see the Christmas
decorations. So on the last Saturday before the holidays our
two families travelled to the city by train, then walked along
Swanston Street to Bourke Street, where all the excitement was.
It was a clear evening yet I was surprised to see so many
people of all ages congesting the pavement in front of Myer
store. Excited children, many in pyjamas and slippers stood
fascinated at the display windows, or perched on the shoulders
of their parents looking fixedly at them.
  Their faces were radiant and eyes glistened as they tried to
follow each movement, each step of the walking, dancing and
singing human-like figures. They pressed their noses to the
glass in wonder, their mouths open, as though they were
actually witnessing a miracle.
  I glanced at Sonny. His face wore the same dream-like
expression and I was grateful to Harry for talking us into
coming.
  "Nu? Didn't I tell you it'll be worthwhile?" he asked, as
though guessing what I thought. I nodded.
  "I bet you haven't seen anything like it in your life" Bronka
said. "Not in Israel anyway."
  I wanted to ask her what she knows about Israel, when Harry
beat me to it. "Maybe it were possible if our uncle Myer
wouldn't have converted and gone to Israel instead of Australia
..." He laughed and then added: "As it is I don't think there
are many shops in the world that can compare with our good old
uncle Myer." He said it in half jest, but I was sure that I
detected pride behind it. It was strange, as the majority of
the Myer family were no longer Jewish, but as I found out soon
after, many of our friends took pleasure in half boasting, half
joking about `our uncle.' It wasn't long before I too, knew the
name of every Jew who contributed to the welfare, politics, or
in any way helped in the development of Australia, and I didn't
hesitate to disclose their names to newcomers and tourists.
  When we finally stood at the windows, I was as fascinated by
the display as the youngsters, following them from window to
window, trying to work out the meaning of each scene.
  "Look, mummy, that Angel looks exactly like Dinah" Sonny
exclaimed, glancing from Dinah to the window and back.
  He was right. Dinah was just as blonde and chubby, with blue
eyes and happy smile, as the angel in the window.
  There weren't many occasions for me and Bronka to share a joke,
trying as we may, so I was happy to tell her what Sonny had
said, and we laughed, feeling a pleasant closeness.
  It was good to be away from the confines of the flat, where I
felt more constricted as time went on.
  "You show me two women who could share a small kitchen and a
tiny bathroom where the toilet has a place of honour right
opposite the door, without having an argument, even when the
children scream, and I'll agree to live like that for another
year" I said to Nathan the previous evening, after Dinah opened
the toilet door and told Sonny to hurry up, or she'll call her
mum.
  "And my poor son ran to me with his pants down and his bottom
dirty" I added.
  "You and Bronka deserve medals" he said. "I'll buy you some."
  I wasn't amused. "It's easy for you to joke. You're never home."
  Now, in the open and with the sky clear above us, all that was
forgotten. We were here to enjoy ourselves.
  "Want to go to a cafeteria?" Harry asked.
  "I want to wee" Dinah said, as we walked to Elizabeth Street
in search of a restaurant or cafeteria.
  "Me too" Sonny whispered in Hebrew.
  "There ought to be a toilet in a cafeteria" Bronka assured the
children. But they didn't want to wait and Dinah started to
cry. So we took the children into a lane and while the men
stood at the entry to it, pretending to be deep in conversation, 
the children went about their business.
  Bronka went to help Dinah to pull her panties up, while I
watched Sonny button up his pants, when Bronka exclaimed: "Look
what you've done! That isn't wee ..."
  "I couldn't help it. I couldn't help it ... it came out
together" Dinah cried.
  Bronka threw a hanky on top of the evidence and we hurried from
the lane. "Let's go, let's go" we urged the men, running. We
turned back into Bourke Street, then to Swanston Street. The
huge Father Christmas on top of Foy's store sparkled with
flickering, multi-coloured lights, but the display windows
didn't attract much interest.
  The cafeteria which we finally found, smelled of fried chips,
the coffee was watery and the snowballs, the only
sweet available at this hour were dry. The children dozed off
with the dripping icecreams in their hands and we had to carry
them to the taxi. On the way home Bronka asked, "Wasn't it
wonderful?"
  "Hmmm" I answered half asleep.
  "Don't tell me that you saw Christmas decorations in Tel Aviv
which were as lovely" she challenged.
  Too tired to answer, I only shook my head.

  It was raining on most days of the two week holidays. Gula and
her family went to Sorrento for two weeks and I spent my time
cleaning, cooking, washing and trying to amuse Sonny.
  Bronka and I tolerated each other and she let me use the stove
and other facilities, careful not to interfere too much and I
of course tried not to be in her way, as well, but it wasn't
easy for any of us.
  "Are we going to live with your brother forever?" I asked
Nathan one evening.
  He looked at me dismayed. "What do you mean? We're here only
seven weeks."
  "Isn't that more than enough?"
  The hurt in his eyes forced me to stop, but a few days later,
after I bumped into Bronka accidentally, making her spill some
soup from the pot she carried, I couldn't hold back my anger
anymore.
  "I want to find a flat" I said. "I know that we need key money,
but if I wait till we save enough, I'll go crazy.
  "You're crazy already if you think that you can have one
without money!" he replied patiently.
  "We can go to Jewish Welfare" I suggested.
  "I'm not going to offend my brother with that. And don't you
mention Welfare in front of him," he pleaded.
  "But I'm not going to wait forever, you'll have to do something" 
I finished with a warning.

  The holidays finished, but the weather was still bad.
  "Worst summer in a long time" Sarah Colman assured me.
  That wasn't much consolation, when I took Sonny to a lady,
whose son went with him to kindergarten and then took the tram
to Balaclava, to work.
  Nathan returned to his permanent job, happy to have saved
eighty pounds from our combined wages and holiday pay.
  "Not bad after two months in the country" he said boastfully.
But this was not enough to ease my tension. We needed at least
three hundred pounds key money for the smallest flat.
  I became nervous, easy to flare up and though I kept my temper
as much as possible, I was irritable and cried at the least
upset.
  One evening we were sitting in the `lounge room' which happened
to be our `bedroom' as well, while Bronka entertained some
friends. The time was dragging on, the children were fast
asleep and the discussion about the importance of traditional
Jewish food in the continuity of `Jewishness' seemed never
ending.
  I was tired after day's work and didn't take part in the discussion, 
hoping that someone would notice my discomfort and
give a sign for the guests to get up, so that I could convert
the sofa they were sitting on, to the bed I was eager to sleep
in. Despite my silent fidgeting and frequent sighs, they were
sitting unperturbed.
  Finally I jumped up, ran to the kitchen and slammed the door
behind me.
  "Why did you do that?" Nathan hissed, coming after me. "Do you
want everyone to think that something is wrong?!"
  I wanted to push him out, to leave me alone, but he held me.
  "What do I care what they think" I cried, "what anyone thinks,
I'm tired, I want to sleep ... All the world knows how
fantastic your family is ... I know, you know. But who cares
... Let us be friends from afar ... All I want is to be on
our own. "Out of here ..."
  "Shash ... Rela, not so loud" Nathan pleaded.
  That was the last straw. I pushed him away screaming. "Shash
yourself, you softie! All you care about is not to upset
your brother and his wife! What about me, ha?! What about your
own wife, whom you dragged away from her brother?! We weren't
some `poor relations' in Israel, why should we be here?!"
  "We aren't poor relations" my husband whispered. "Have a little
bit of patience. I'll see what we can do, please, Rela." It was
quiet in the kitchen. Not a sound was coming from the
loungeroom either.
  "If you haven't any money, you can try and pawn your `bobes
yerusheh' I said sarcastically. I don't care what you do. I
want out of here, that's all."
  I looked at my husband, my heart felt heavy, but I forced
myself to continue, though in a quieter, distinctive tone. "I
can't go on like that. You don't have to commit murder, or to
steal, but I'm telling you to hurry and find other
accommodation, before I do something drastic. So ... either
you find us a flat very soon or else ..."
  "Oy vey is mier" Nathan wailed and I knew that I didn't have
to finish the sentence.

  After a sleepless night I was on my way to work the following
morning, with Bronka close at my heels telling me what to buy
on the way home, when Nelly stopped us.
  "Poor old Tilby from the flat above passed away" she said.
  "Sorry, I late to work" I said, walking on.
  But she stopped me. "This may be your lucky strike, Rela, you
know." She started to explain and though I only understood part
of it, I rushed after Bronka to their apartment.
  "Quick, go to the agent" she urged Harry. "Mister Tilby died
and we can have his flat."
  I shuddered. Oh, God. Could he have died because of my threat
to Nathan? The thought haunted me for a while, then came back
when Harry returned from the agent with the news that we can
have the flat. "The agent was so quick to agree to my proposition, 
that for a moment I thought he was waiting for me. And no key money. What do you say to that, ha?"

