<sample>
	<id> K10 </id>
	


	<note> 2009 words </note>
	


	<source> Five gazeboes </source>
	


	<bl> By Marion Campbell </bl>
	


	<h> I </h>
	
It's an odd sort of sentimentality that makes Billie use the
gas lamp in here. There's a cable connecting the house up to
the electricity. The pool of light isolates them, over the
board. Harry is reading, Lydia says, yet leaves me to the
penumbra. Looks like a seance going on. Billie, studying the
tiles, works away at her jaw. The movement makes the pinned-
back zebra tuft of hair jump. Odd departures: holidays for her
are a break with the taste codes more than anything, the rules
she sets herself in the city. She leaves behind all that
infrastructure of corsets and things and lets the massive
breasts have their way under the windcheater to an
indeterminate point of fusion with the belly. She leaves the
old butchers' and real estate agents' calendars on their nails,
hasn't bothered replacing the lumpy velveteen furniture, this
sofa with its embossed orange triangles and nebulae of
sparkles, springs popping through in places. Lydia sighs,
rattles the ice in her scotch. Juvenated by the soft light.
  Gaze! Billie says between her teeth.
  Lydia has put down gaze. The curve of her cheek relaxes a bit.
The high seriousness of it. That's where we've always had
problems: the emotion she spends over little things.

The immense effort she made that day, all soap-lathered in the
shower, to rescue an albino cricket that had been mishatched
in the drain. When do they get their colour? Does the sun bring
the pigment out? She got herself into a frenzy, skidding on the
soap, covering the poor bugger, as Billie would say, with
lather. If it had had the heart, she would have applied
artificial respiration there and then. What do they use to
breathe? Apertures? Little holes in the abdomen? What kind of
fluid transport for food? Kind of clear liquid when you squash
them. Liquid: good way of adding to someone's quid in that
game. But is quid slang? These two don't allow slang. Gaze, she
put. Always fancied crossing eye myself. The Y on a triple
letter:

That'd be, say, one plus three times four plus one, that's
fourteen twice, that's twenty-eight. Trouble is though, the
single player can't do it, can't go in two directions at once.
Just the two of them, night after night, at the Scrabble. Harry
would rather read, Lydia says.
  Would Harry? Does Harry? Billie asks.
  I think he's dozed off already, Lydia says.
  What can I do but doze off when they leave me without light.
Look at that: the small flat spread of my thighs. Were they
ever ... And then this old baggage. Lydia never said
anything, but for how long now has it been? Five, ten years,
more, that she has been buying these formless trousers with the
low crutch. Harry Grogan spreads his toes: see his pale old
horny nails.

Ageing, it's got her too of course. Except in that glow,
there's the peachy down on the cheek as reminder. Still that
same nervous quiver in the lip she had that first day. Lipstick
sometimes gets canalised in the fine cracks running up. No use
saying anything, though. First time I walked in on her
plastering herself with night creams, she gave a little
screech. I said, come on, Lyd, a face with a couple of lines
is more interesting, more touching. A face that has lived,
felt.
  Withered and sagged, she hissed.
  She took it that I was triumphing in her catching up on our
fifteen-year difference. If I said: Your face brings out a kind
of sorrowful tenderness in me, she'd take it that the old man
is just trying to wheedle something out of her. Her old
cornflower blue eyes with that touch of real violet, they still
have the occasional flash. No, not a flash: a sudden flooding
glow.

I didn't consciously go for the opposite in Bess. But there it
was: Bess all olive, with the scattering of small black freckles 
over the nose. Sinewy where Bess was softness. Hint of a moustache 
I saw that day on the ferry. Her rousing bitter wit. Something 
like savagery at times. Harry Grogan was just an excursion for 
her, anyhow. Harry she said, there's something almost immoral in 
your placidity, your British control. Something Lydia has never 
done, attacked my Englishness. Lydia with her poodle perm peroxide 
and the Australian wrinkles I know are there, at the back of her 
neck. The bowed nape calls out for touch. There is a tacit taboo 
against my wandering over to take a peek at their letters. Perhaps 
that's what's in this game for them: the tracing and crossing of 
little stories they won't tell out loud. Or they can't tell. 
Hinting through the grid their female unsayable.

Lloyd's muzzle is quivering, he lets out a groan. He shrinks
and ripples his skin: it's the irritation of the salt. My
bringing old Lloydie slightly resented. Nothing said of course.
But Lydia has Ratsel on her lap. That's all right but that dog
of yours smells, Harry. Burmese travel well, she keeps on
insisting. Despite the operatic yowl he maintained through the
ninety minute trip here. Billie asks: What is it between you
two and your pets?
  They relieve us of unnecessary talk, Lydia says.
  True, she makes little speeches about men to Ratsel, who's a
bloke anyhow, for God's sake. But she felt bound to sterilise
him, poor bastard .
  Ratsel, she says, you'd think an eighty-year-old man would have
at least learnt to carry his cornflake bowl to the sink,
wouldn't you?
  And I fall into the game too: Old Lloydie, I say, let's take
a walk, take a break from these fusspot women.
  There she is, anyhow, applying her palm to the sleek elastic
body of her beloved castrato.
  Five, Billie is saying. That's a double letter, that's eight
and one, that's nine and four and one, that's oh dear, that's
pretty poor isn't it, that's fourteen.
  Don't worry, Lydia says. I don't think I can do anything much.
Oh, wait, wait. It might just ... Dreiundzwanzig dreimal,
... Das macht neunundsechzig, she murmurs.
  That's how they catch spies out - now who told me that? -
they get them to count. Not many, even amongst the best
linguists, who can count in an automatic way in a foreign
language.
  Gazeboes, Billie says, my God, on the triple too. That's what,
that's sixty-nine. Harry, Harry, Lydia has gazeboes on the
triple word score!
  Five gazeboes, Lydia laughs. She gives Ratsel a long deep caress
this time.
  That house with the gazebo in East Fremantle is going for
three hundred and fifty thousand dollars, Billie says. Did you
see that? Seems the first owner stuck it on for her cigar
smoking husband.
  He probably planned it all. Probably took up cigars so she'd
have to give him his own space. Could tell them about the bloke
on the Costa Brava who built seven gazeboes onto his place, one
hexagonal turret for each of his daughters. In that case for
display? Seven daughters embroidering their complaints through
the latticed stars, dark limbs aglow. Lydia catches my look:
what has she meshed into? Or does she just want my accolade
for her tour de force?

Silly songs Bess improvised. Her laughter gypsy warm. Inside
the gazebo at South Beach, she stretched out in a lewdly
seductive pose:

  Honey just when you think you're spying on them 
  you find your bodies form a harem 
  inside it ...

I've got it here, that's what Lydia doesn't know. The postcard
inside the Anna Karenina: the Turkish Bath as only memento. Lydia 
is not such a psychic that she could see a connection in that. Keep
it more for its negative charge anyhow. Bess said she'd never
seen anything so repulsive. The painter she most hated, she
said, when I admitted my fascination. Especially his Turkish
Bath. It's not just cold, she said, it's arctic. It's an arctic
celebration of voyeurism, and you like that, Harry! Look at
that, that's how he sees women. Bess's exaggerations. Harry,
she said, it's pornography, all the more creepy because it's
so controlled. Nasty poreless, hairless, satin bodies submitted
to the demands of so-called Neoclassicism: balance. Taming
grids. And you like that, Henry Grogan!

Perhaps, perhaps there was something of that, but there's more
to the picture. As you stare, it's the three dark bodies that
come alive. And the dark recesses, the false exits, arresting
your gaze. Bess, Bess, never did unlock your secret. Bess, the
landlord's daughter tying a dark red loveknot in her long black
hair. Stock Road unribboning to her. But it had to be always
in the glare of the afternoon. Catching my breath on the bare
porch of her ugly little house in Palmyra. Bess who mocked me
for slavishly entering ticks for present and a's for absent in
my register. Bess, I said, it's your larrikin mentality that
is deviant, not my observation of a few rules. The way you cook
marks is downright dishonest. Bess: too much of an inveterate
actress or exhibitionist to keep discipline. Kids need a
certain predictability, consistency, and she was never that,
consistent. Her classes always riotous. Doubt if the kids ever
picked anything up from her lessons, but a certain fascination
for her unaustralian animation might have lingered. I would
find her leaping around, darkly flushed, picking up Plasticine
and paper projectiles from the classroom floor after school.
Once she lost her whole class to the lavatory block. They had
made their exits, one after the other, all miming desperately
overburdened bladders.
  Harry's back in his Tolstoy, Lydia says.
  Harry is not. Harry is rereading Bess through Ingres. Her
surplus of energy diminishing mine. Harry's just all talk, she
jibed later in the staffroom. Henry's into the History of Crime
and Punishment: so she introduced me to the other guests at the
Rottnest Lodge.
  And Bess is into Histrionics, I said.
  But later, she was unable to give way to her normal sexual
exuberance. In the cell where they had locked away mainland
Aboriginals. And later, after 1907, wanton or homeless boys of
any race. She peopled the little room with tortured bodies,
unable to accept my white flesh intact. This time, the failure
was hers. The last time. And the texture of the moth-eaten
candlewick spread, I can still find its sad grooves and ridges
under my fingertips. Finally we fell into an uneasy sleep in
our disunited cots. The next morning, Bess had a terrible
darkness under her eyes.

Might as well shuffle off now. They're set to play for ever.
Lydia puts off sleep until later each night. She doesn't sleep
and claims that as a kind of virtue. Against my fondness for
siestas. Unnecessary siesta sleep breeds the best dreams.
Lloydie bows in a prolonged stretch, yawns. He tags along.


	<h> II </h>
	
Look at that: his hip humped against where I am meant to lie.
The sheet drawn up to his side. What is it now? Close on twenty
years that we've had our separate beds, ten that we've been in
separate rooms. He never got used to eiderdowns. Nor Ratsel.
The sea's suspenseful crashing in this room full of breath, dog
breath and his shallower kind. Window white, blue white and
then darkened, whitening again: the lighthouse beam. He holds
his face pouched to the cushion and the mulberry mapping of the
capillaries laces the retina after the beam has gone. These
distances he establishes. Diese endliche Ferne. Although Billie
knows it, we didn't play in German. But I could have used
ferns. Ferns on the forest bed in that sifted light. Not this
sweeping alternation. Das brausende Getose des Seegangs says
it better for these rhythms, for the push, the big push, the
hush and then the stifled roar again, with the light curtain
lifting. If I had this place, I'd have no curtains, only the
shape of dunes shouldering the house, the rhythm of those and
the light.


</sample>
