by jenny boult 5. the tester  

the days are always full of suprises in this job. you never know what's
going on. there's always something different to do or eat or whatever it
happens to be.

take this morning for instance. i woke up to the sound of a new alarm clock.
it speaks the time &amp; sings. it's o.k.. i put "alarming" in the additional
comments section of the report sheet. it's the first time i've ever done
that. usually,the boxes cover everything i have to say.

i light a cigarette from the plain white box stamped K36. i compare it with
one from an identical box stamped P54. i can't tell the difference. i fill
out the forms.

the toilet is sanitised. the form next to it asks, "how would you describe
the smell?" i tick the box marked "floral". there isn't a space marked
chemical. i suggest an irritant factor might be useful. no new box appears.

the soap is called S34, the toothpaste F. it's horrible. my teeth feel
like a chalk mine. tyre tracks on my tongue.

for breakfast there's another cereal that tastes like all the others. no
change. some are more chewy or harder than others, but they all taste the
same. it's the "no sugar" set's idea of variety, but bran's bran &amp; it doesn't
seem to matter much which grain it comes from. i can tell the difference
between homogenised milk &amp; unhomogenised. i know all the textures &amp; all
the flavours. sometimes i make guesses about them, the collectors don't
tell you anything though. i don't think they know any more about it than
i do. they deliver my daily samples, put out the forms &amp; writing implements
&amp; then collect them again at night time. usually when i'm asleep.

it's an interesting life. or it would be except that i'm sick of not really
knowing what any of this stuff really is. i mean, you never know whether
the mayonnaise is poly-unsaturated or oil-free or any of that kind of thing.

i get so tired of white. flavour testing. that's what i specialise in. it's
the taste that counts, they tell me. colour will only influence your decisions,
they tell me. i don't care any more. i've started taking trips round the
supermarkets reading the labels. nothing puts me off my food. i think they
might have put me on a diet. i was quite heavy for a while there. it was
all the chocolate. i must be the only person in the world who's lived for
6 weeks on bananas &amp; mars bars. some of those mars bars were really stale,
too. you know the ones that get left in the sun to melt &amp; then go hard again.
i like fresh, dark ones better.

then there's the domestic testing. toilet &amp; laundry products. i've had some
terrible dermatitis since i've been here.

one thing about this kind of job though. you don't have to worry about
anything. you know exactly where the next meal's coming from, there's always
a roof over your head. you don't have to think about money or anything.
life's easy for you here. i don't like their ideas about entertainment.
i get so tired of commercials, but it's nice to know that i had a hand in
the marketing of the products. to be a part of a team. even though i don't get
to talk to anyone much, it's good to know about it. i've asked the collectors
about the weather, but i think they know about as much about it as i do.
we don't get out very often here. we're always too busy.

&amp; now they've started diversifying me. they've put me on shoes. i never
had to test clothing or footwear before. not like this. we all did it. i
get a different pair of shoes three times a day. like medicine. &amp; they give
me blisters. i hate sore feet. it makes me angry when my feet are sore.
&amp; it makes me remember the times before i came here. my mother bought me
hard shoes that blistered my heels &amp; gave me corns on my toes.

"you'll learn," she screamed. "you'll learn one day. there'll be a lot more
discomfort in your life than a pair of new shoes." she was so sure. so certain.
& then, when i told her i was going to be a tester she screamed louder than
ever. "you'd sell your soul for a new dress & a good dinner." i shrugged.
suffering didn't appeal to me.

so what's wrong with security? it's all right in here. better than one of
the company testing units. There are full-time testers on assembly lines
there. single purpose testers. imagine twenty five years of testing toilet
paper. they'd have to test laxatives as well to make it worthwhile. i like
it here, where we try everything, eventually. we get things first, before
anyone else. it doesn't get boring because everything's new. there's a
neverending flow of variety. & you can choose. there are choices. it's
comforting. you can shop. there are clothes, furniture, fittings. if you
aren't on a specific test you can have anything you like. as long as it's
here to be tested. 

they put the tv in strange places sometimes. the bath? the roof? but it's
easy enough to have it moved. you dial a number, tell them how long you
looked for it, how long before you started talking to yourself, responses,
that kind of thing. you get used to it.

i go out with the other testers sometimes. we don't worry about it too often.
we stand out from the crowd. like something out of the future. & i guess
we are. my sister buys a new dress, & it's a copy of something we had five
or six years ago. the crowd is a delayed reaction to our experience.

why shouldn't i be a tester? they think it's a cushy life. but we do fill
out the forms. it's hard work sometimes. the diets, the irregularity, you
know, i never felt like this before my feet got sore.

pill 58DX today. i hate the pharmaceuticals. this one works. the 369LK didn't
yesterday. & the sleepers. i never needed sleepers before.

i can't dance. & they're playing next easter's top 40 in the disco tonight.
now that i think about it, my feet are a lot better. unguent 220. i think
they've come up with a combination. i pass this information on to the collector.
collectors never smile.

it makes me feel good to know that i'm contributing to the well-being &
continued pain relief of the rest of the world. in ten years someone will
be grateful to me for this one. but they won't even think about me. testers
don't get thought about much out there. most people don't even know we exist.
sad, isn't it?

the side effects are a bit of a worry sometimes. you aren't always prepared
for them. like the time i lost my hair after the M24 hairdressing trials.
they isolated the hairspray & marketed it as a depilatory. it's broken all
their sales records. we had the whole lite'n'fluffy cake range after that.
a celebration. light'n'fluffy iced all over the cakes. that was unusual.
we weren't complaining. good old M24. i think they're putting a tanning
agent into it now.

still. this is a good combination. i like it here. i like my job. i'm an
important part of a team. i enjoy my work. don't think about independence
& family. there are families here. they squabble among themselves. the children
don't like the white packets at first. they show peak resistance at about
3, then they learn.

they have apartments. children inhabit the creches. you can have as much
or as little time with them as you like. according to the rosters & what
the programme is at any given time. some of them have gardens. anyone can
have a garden. they test pesticides & lawnmowers in them.

look. the main thing is, you can get used to anything. in here, everything's
provided. you're out of the rat race. you're assured of the basic necessities.
i like it here. nothing's ever the same two days in a row, unless they're
monotony testing. the cooking's pretty bad sometimes. the sheets are washed
& the beds made.

i made the right decision when i made up my mind to come here. snap of the
fingers. a record comes on. two snaps. coffee or tea. twitch of the finger
sugar or milk. we all know the codes. coffee number X12 is lousy. but it'll
be something else tomorrow. the forms don't change much. five snaps the
AV gear really starts up. anything you like. a video library that hasn't
been made yet.

i know exactly how lucky i am. i don't need to gamble. seven snaps. eternal
night. the pink boat on the green river. it's the sore feet, the winning
combination, the demons in me make me want to try my luck tonight. testing
... testing ...
snap. snap. snap. snap. snap.    snap.   sna   ...      


 6. no room at the top  

1.
the panther creeps over the roofs of derelict houses. the planners refer
to this place as "redevelopment". it's perth of course. where everything
is new, or about to be built.
these houses skulk under the threat of demolition. they crack their windows
& doorframes in defiance, but they know that their battle is already lost.
their banners have been pulled down & left to rot in damp corners.
the panther is 25 years old & feeling his age. he doesn't ram it up the
way he used to. the faces aren't as pretty as they once were. the shoes
are not as expensive & are in need of repair.

a voice echoes down the dark tunnels that mark the territory of defeat.
we called them streets not long ago. smoke twisted from the chimneys & students
of mathematics & history pored over weighty texts late into the night.
"alice. alice." he hears it clearly now & his yellow eyes beam over the
oblique canyons like spotlights. he picks out a figure crumpled into the
road.
the voice calls again. "alice. alice." she runs in & out of the shadows
calling. this woman is hysteria. "alice. alice." her voice rises like an 
ill-made kite on the wind. tortured, out of balance.

 2.  
this is a teenager's bedroom, with pop-star posters on the walls & cigarettes
under the mattress. cindy lauper sings "she-bop" on an inadequate transistor
radio. the three young women know the song by heart.

"ideally, he would be an astronaut."

"you're aiming a bit high aren't you?"

"she-bop, she-bop, she-bop-a-she-bop ..."

 3.  
"what time is it, then, if it isn't time to go home?"
the child can wander no further. she is cold, tired, hungry & lost. she
is waif & stray.

"alice. alice."
the voice bites the night, cold as frost. in the intimacy of a front bar
there is a man whose responsibility controls him like a hangover.
the woman's slippers flap like dead fowls as she crashes wildly from one
side of the street to the other.

the panther wonders whether she is aware that he is watching her. he focuses
on her, high beam, & directs her to the child.

"alice. alice." she is weeping now. the tears burn like shame into the enlarged
pores over her cheek bones.
the child is too tired to cry, & having discovered a familiar place, she
has already begun to doze in the woman's desperate embrace.

 4.  
she eats grapes as though her life depends on it. she has returned from
the dinner party where the hostess fell asleep in her own vomit. three bottles
of french champagne soak into the brightly coloured mohair sweater that
drapes her anorexic frame. she laughs. secure in the knowledge of her own
invulnerable charm & impeccable behaviour. 

