The third commandment of Cologne By John Emery  

THERE IS a moment, some mornings, when Kurt wakes up and, waking, thinks
he is in Cologne. He thinks he can hear the sound of little men in trilbies
and roll-neck sweaters clomping on the pavement. Standing at the kerb blowing
on their fingers against the cold. He thinks he can hear the roar of traffic.
The smell of industrial fumes brought down by the cold, damp wind off the
Rhine. If he went to the window he would see their closed-up faces, staring
down at the grey pavement, avoiding each other as they scurry to the office,
the factory, wherever.
  It is a moment of panic and there is only one way to over-come it. He
throws off the blanket and heaves himself up from the bed. He is naked and
he is not cold. That is the first sign of reassurance. He can hear his wife
singing, not in German, not even in French - even though her French is
excellent, better than his - but in a language made up almost entirely of
vowels. An oceanic language. Limpid, languid, mellifluous. He hears his
children shout in the same tongue.
  Reassured he pulls aside the Dayglo drape and looks out.

  THE COLOGNE feeling is explained by the low cloud, clinging to the peaks.
Up there are growing rows and rows of pines. The cloud hugs the shape of
the peak. The great brooding mass of rock that looms over the ruins of the
Nunnery. Ka veve o ke zine.
  He peers out and now he knows he is not in Cologne. He thinks it could
be somewhere in Spain. The white cobblestone blocks that lead under the
trees to the Cathedral. The peeling blue paint on the cathedral. The nick
in the side of one of its towers where a charge of shot slammed during the
dispute, 130 years ago, with the Jesuit missionaries who had press-ganged
all the inhabitants into building the cathedral, the summer palace for the
king, the cobbled roads. Thousands of the inhabitants died, he remembers,
in that insane burst of building, when Pere Laval had his vision that here
would be the Pacific's centre of Catholicism. From here would the tide of
Protestantism be rolled right back to Manchester.
  And he built the Nunnery beneath Ka veve o ke zine. Hill where women jump
in the old tongue. An activity almost given up until the nunnery's regime
of Catechism, sewing, the singing of dirge-like hymns instead of the dancing
of the tamore, revived it.
  Kurt hates the Church, and now he hears the bell toll out that today is
All Souls Day, and he realises that his wife is singing precisely because
she is going to Mass, and for him to fight it would not stop her, would
do nothing but point up the division that lies between them, the chasm that
he is not yet ready to cross. The chasm of the Pacific Ocean; between Cologne
and his home, here, on the island.
  He lights a Galloise. The patisserie will be open soon and he'll get some
fresh croissants for breakfast. Today he is going to set levels for the
concreting work he is doing for the gendarme. He turns away from the town
window and goes to the other window and opens it, and smiles.
  He keeps this view till last. He likes to feel the panic that maybe he
is back in Europe. He likes to resolve it slowly, step by step. And this
is the second last step. He stares down at the wharf. There's a ship at
the end of it, must have come in last night. A small trader. He immediately
looks across the bay, but the French destroyer is gone. The cloud is breaking,
but the lagoon is still a dirty grey. Soon it will sparkle blue. There is
a wind from the south-east and it's bringing up chop. If his friend, Tihoni,
is on that boat then he won't be able to get out to his island.
  He looks for Tihoni's island: Kamaka. It's a small volcanic peak with
a sliver of beach. As the cloud lifts he can see out to the reef. It's always
a reassuring sight to see that reef, even though it's 25 km away, so far
all you can see is a line of coconut palms, like telephone poles, rising
out of the lumpy ocean. A row of telephone poles that circles Mangareva
and keeps the Pacific Ocean from slamming the brittle volcanic debris that
makes up the islands into powder.
  "O Kurt? Kurt? Take the boys down to the baker, will you? Get them some
breakfast. My sister is here for Mass."
  He turns slowly, for the final confirmation that he has made it, he has
got rid of Europe, little men in trilbies, cold smog, closed in faces. He
shuts out the mention of Mass. Just as, if he had seen the destroyer over
by the pearl-farm when he looked, he wouldn't have seen it either.
  She smiles at him. Her eyes are brown, almost black. Her hair is black,
long, fine. Her skin is brown and so clear. No one in Europe ever had skin
that clear. She wears a tight, red and blue and yellow dress. It is too
tight. He stops himself from frowning. Last year it was just tight enough.
Next year she will have to admit the truth and buy a larger size. Polynesian
women expand to fill their years.
  And the boys look up at him, too. Not as brown as her. He smiles at her
as he takes their hands. Their young fingers are browner than his, but clear
and unweathered. She brushes against him, letting him feel her thanks that
he is not making a scene about Mass.

  WHEN KURT was a boy Cologne was a pile of rubble being bulldozed. It
was a street of G.I's with gum and jeeps. It was a place where no one talked
about anything that had happened. History had been a bad dream and now that
they were awake they'd not mention it - even though everyone had the identical
dream, even though there were still bodies waiting to be discovered, bombs
that would explode as Kurt and his friends clambered amongst the ruins.
  There was a cathedral in Cologne, too. He could just remember the way
its twin towers soared into the sky, like gingerbread mountains. The cathedral,
too, was full of rubble. People picked through the rubble as if they were
looking for the Relics, unable to believe that so Holy a place could have
been touched by something as mundane as bombs.
  If the home of the Relics of the Magi could be desecrated, then what hope
was there for any dreams?
  Through the rubble the dreamers walked. The only people who seemed awake
were the G.I's. Kurt watched them closely. He watched how his own people
both shrank away from them and also kow-towed to them. He watched the return
of the men to the town. The haunted, broken faces of the men. The women
trying not to watch their return, trying not to act as if they knew their
own man was not amongst them. Kurt's mother's man. Kurt's father. Not there.
Gone.
  Kurt made three silent vows. And, being the vows of a child, uttered in
secret, they would bind him forever.
  One. He would become a soldier, like the G.I's. 
  Two. He would leave Cologne forever.
  Three. He would never think about history.
  He also made a wish. That, in his life as a soldier, at wherever it was
soldiers went, he would find his father. But he already knew the wish would
not come true. He only made the wish in anger at his mother's association
with the G.I's.

  KURT DISCOVERED you couldn't be a soldier in Germany any more. The Germans
were people of the broken dream. Kurt searched until he found an army he
could join. It was in France. The Foreign Legion.
  Kurt went first to Africa. He didn't like Africa. It, too, was full of
dream-walkers. Impatiently, he pressed for a transfer, and was offered
Polynesie. He didn't know where it was, or what he'd be doing there. He
didn't care. He went.
  Kurt takes the boys down to the Patisserie. The people on the street shout
hullo to him. No trilbies. Shorts and open, flower-strewn shirts. Sarongs.
In the hair cascades of real flowers. That's what he loves the best. Those
intricate baskets of flowers they weave into their hair. The men with floral
head-dresses and frangipani and hibiscus behind their ears. That's what
he likes. 
  The church-goers are streaming ahead of him. All the fine young girls
and the young family men with wives and children. If he joined the church
he knows he would close off just a bit more of the chasm between himself
and, not just Eugine, but also her sister, and her mother, and by that process
all her relatives. But something blocks inside him at the thought of it.
  The boys want ice-cream. Of course they want ice-cream. What he would
like to do right now is take their breakfast and go out to the boat and
head out over a patch of coral and put a couple of lines over the side and
see what comes up.
  But he knows what would come up. Siguratera gambiera would come up.
  He frowns and lights another smoke. For a moment there, history crept
in. Blue-green algae. French destroyers. The long concrete and iron shed
away off across town, with the sprinklers on the roof.

  THAT SHED was the biggest joke of all. When he first arrived in Mangareva,
with the Foreign Legion, they were just building it. There used to be 15,000
people in these islands, the Gambier Islands, of which Mangareva was the
largest, before Father Louis Jacques Laval and his assistants had arrived,
in 1834. By the time they were removed the population was down to 5,000.
  By 1963 the population was 2,500. Mangareva was becoming a ghost island
with a huge white cathedral and the tombs of the old Polynesian kings. 
  The French authorities were worried about the wind.
  The wind which blew from Muroroa Atoll, about 800 km to the west. They
offered the islanders a deal. Free air fares and freight if they shifted
to the island of Tahiti.
  That's right, they said. Join the relatives in the metropolis. Be where
the action was. Dancing and drinking. Buy a Citroen. Use some of your
traditional rights and request a piece of land. Get to hell out of this
dying atoll.
  And most of the Mangarevans did just that. But about a thousand stayed
on. Well, Polynesie, is a Province of France, and France is the home of
democracy. French officials were not going to force people to leave their
homes. Indeed, no. 
  But they would suggest to the Mangarevans that, when the hooter sounded,
they all file down to the nice new shed the Legionnaires were building,
with the sprinklers on the roof, and stay there until the next hooter sounded.
  "But, why? What's the danger?"
  "Danger? Danger? There is no danger. This is but a precaution."
  "A precaution against what?"
  Kurt had seen it before. The baffled faces. The officer being pleasant,
until pressed beyond a certain point. The troops sitting in the truck, rifles
between their knees. He'd seen it before, but could barely remember it -
even though it was now him sitting in the truck, holding the rifle, watching
the officer's back.
  All he could remember was the Third Commandment of Cologne.
  Forget about history.
  He built the shed. He herded the islanders into it. Once they sat there
for 24 hours without food, Kurt included, staring up at the chink of sky
they could see where they'd run out of roofing iron, along one side. The
sprinklers were sprinkling away, flushing whatever it was the officer didn't
want anyone to know about, off the roof, down the concrete channel, and
into the lagoon.             

