Marching on a great road By Peter McConnell  

IN HIS THIRD YEAR at university, Jeffrey Watson grew a beard and took to
wearing jungle boots into lectures. He bought a Mao badge and a Little Red
Book, joined the Labour Club and on a visit home announced to his parents
that he was rejecting, out of hand, the entire existing social order.
  His mother was a little shocked. She had brought her son up in a respectable
way, a Christian way, and had always wanted him to have nice friends. It
was her hope that he should settle down in a good career. At Scotch College
Jeffrey had been a Prefect and a Cricket Blue. He had won a prize for an
essay entitled "What Does the Commonwealth Mean to Us?" But now all that
lay in the past. Jeffrey had grown a beard and was associating with a scruffy
crowd of radicals, many of whom were not even British. Where would it all
end?
  Jeffrey's father on the other hand was non-committal. The boy was still
very young he would say, and going through a stage. He must be left alone
to work out his own pathway in life.
  In spite of Mr Watson's tolerance however, relations with his son did
become rather strained at times. At weekends Jeffrey would arrive home with
carloads of his new friends. They would virtually occupy the old Victorian
house in South Yarra. Its panelled rooms would echo to the strident sound
of Chinese songs: "Red is the East" and "Marching on a Great Road." Violent
arguments would break out beneath the family portraits on Imperialism,
Revisionism and other "isms" which no-one else in the family had so much as 
heard of. At his own mahogany dinner table Mr Watson would be needled
about his Directorships, his BHP shares and his Heysens by wild-eyed, bearded
youths.
  However, he remained unfailingly tolerant and at the most heated moments
would calm everybody by saying: "Gentlemen! What about some more wine?"
  Jeffrey seemed to blame his father for so much. Behind his back he would
describe him as "a reactionary bourgeois" or "a comprador". It seemed to
him that the men of his father's generation had betrayed the youth of today
and had left them facing a world of poverty, war and injustice. Take Vietnam
for example. It made him angry and bitter to think that people like himself,
with a good education, could be packed off to Vietnam to fight.
  On May day, Jeffrey Watson was arrested at an anti-war demonstration at
the US Consulate. On hearing the news Mr Watson proceeded at once to the
police station to bail him out. As a civic leader with a legal background
he was able to arrange this quite easily. Jeffrey was amused by the whole
experience. It gave him something exciting to talk about at the Labour Club.
  A little later, on July 4th, Jeffrey was arrested again at a second
demonstration. Mr Watson was not so quick on the scene this time. He was
forced to spend the night in a small, damp cell. There were also some
unpleasant threats from an insensitive policeman. When Jeffrey mentioned
his father's name the threats ceased abruptly. Still, for a moment he had
been thoroughly frightened. On his release next day he resolved that he
would avoid undue prominence at future demonstrations and concentrate more
on agitational work among the broad student masses.
  Besides, he had another distraction now. He was becoming very involved
with a new girlfriend whom he had met at a political meeting.
  Her name was Hannah. She had long black hair, pale skin and a very dramatic
personality. A firm believer in Women's Liberation, she refused to wear
make-up or dresses on principle. Jeffrey was fascinated by her. With her
independence and contempt for convention she was a complete contrast to
the middle-class girls he had known in the past. After a short acquaintance
they decided to set up house together in a student commune in Carlton.
  The commune, or "foco" as it was sometimes called, was situated in an
old, run-down terrace with a wrought-iron balcony. Jeffrey shifted his stereo,
his clothes and his textbooks there from South Yarra and comforted his mother,
who insisted on weeping at his leaving home.
  He and Hannah spent a whole day painting their new room white and decorating
the walls with red and yellow posters from the East Wind bookshop. The posters
showed the workers of the world breaking loose from their chains and striding
heroically towards the sunrise.
  Their life together was very happy. On Saturday mornings they went shopping
in Lygon St. They wandered hand in hand through the park, helped one another
with their essays and slept together in a big double bed with a red and
black bedspread.
  At night, students from the commune and the radical movement would crowd
together in the lounge. The room would fill with blue marijuana smoke and
to the sound of clinking beer glasses Maoists, Anarchists and Guevarists
would clash furiously. Someone with a guitar would strike up a Bob Dylan
song. Karl Marx himself, in his black frock coat, gazed benevolently down
from the wall, next to Mick Jagger. Looking up at them with a "joint" in
his hand Jeffrey would think proudly of how far he had come. He was light
years away now from family and his old college friends.
  Nonetheless, he never lost touch entirely with his former world. Now and
then he would run across old Scotch College acquaintances in the university
cafe. Smiling faintly he would listen as they talked of their boring bourgeois
lives - the same old chundering sessions, sports cars and law studies. Then
quietly, with the air of an insider, he would relate some incident from
hs new life. He would describe how they had exposed a Revisionist, thrown
rocks at a govenment office or let down the tyres of the Vice-Chancellor's
car. His old friends would listen, horrified, yet secretly impressed.
  Nor did Jeffrey lose touch with his family.
  In second term he even took Hannah out to South Yarra for tea. The evening
however was not a great social success. Hannah insisted on wearing her
filthiest blue jeans and on parading her full vocabulary of four letter
words. Mrs Watson was frigidly polite. Mr Watson did his best with questions
about Hannah's family - her parents had kept a small shop - but it was clear
that nobody was at ease. Among the family portraits and monogrammed silver
Hannah seemed strangely out of place, and a little vulgar. Her table manners
were atrocious.
  It was soon after this visit that they began to have their first quarrels.
There were several things about Hannah which puzzled and worried Jeffrey.
It turned out that she had slept with several other boyfriends before him.
That shocked him a good deal, and they had a quarrel about it. Then again,
she was absurdly over-sensitive on some subjects. Once Jeffrey had made
a perfectly harmless joke about the Jews and she had flared up at him in
a ridiculous way. They had a quarrel about that too.
  It was a very difficult relationship on occasions. Sometimes Hannah would
cling to him like a child, then at other times she would act as if she hated
him. She would tell him about her unhappy childhood: her alcoholic father,
her chaotic family and the Polish relatives who had died in concentration
camps. She would break down, cry and cling to him, and Jeffrey would feel
embarrassed and guilty. At these times he wanted nothing more than to get
away from her.
  Little by little he was also becoming disillusioned about the radical
movement. The demonstrations were no longer as exciting for him as they
had once been. It was always the same old red flags and familiar faces from
the Labour Club and SDS. The political discussions were beginning to bore
him too. Sometimes, sitting in the middle of a long, involved debate about
Dialectics or Alienation or what Trotsky said to Bukharin in 1928 he would
find himself yawning and almost dropping off to sleep.
  The student radicals were starting to irritate him. He couldn't help thinking
sometimes that they were narrow-minded, resentful and envious, and a little
unbalanced with all their talk of injustice. They all seemed to have chips
on their shoulders, and were forever in a rage about something - Vietnam,
Aborigines, prisoners - if it was not one thing it was another. Certainly
there was injustice in Australia, but, as his father said, no society was
without its faults. You couldn't change human nature. It was all very well
for them to do away with God, the family, private property and the State,
but what were they going to put in the place of these things? Utopian theories
which had never worked! It was not very constructive.
  Sometimes, watching them arguing furiously away about the worries of the
world, Jeffrey would find himself thinking of his Uncle George who was
a Colonel in the Army. Uncle George had said once that all these grousers
and malcontents and radicals were just people who couldn't make it in normal
society. They should all be given a taste of the lash and clapped into the
Army for a few years: and that would cure them. Dear old Uncle George and
his simple notions.
  There were incidents at the commune which got on Jeffrey's nerves.
  Because he had an allowance from his parents they expected him to contribute
constantly to every cause which came along. Money was always being needed
for legal expenses, for getting draft resisters out of gaol, for medical
aid to Zimbabwe or Vietnam or the West Zanzibar Liberation Front - and they
looked down their noses at him if he didn't contribute. They seemed to think
he was made of money.
  Another of his pet grievances was that the others at the commune had no
sense of property. They were forever borrowing his stereo and his typewriter
and his Bob Dylan records, and somehow he never liked to object. To object
would have been "bourgeois".
  But the worst thing of all about the place was the dirt. Jeffrey did his
best to keep the house clean, but the others seemed to simply revel in squalor.
There was always rubbish lying about, dirty dishes in the sink and half-starved
cats prowling through the kitchen. Hannah was the worst offender of all.
In spite of his efforts she kept their room like a pig-sty, with underwear,
books and papers scattered everywhere. It was driving Jeffrey up the wall.
  And then, beyond all the temporary problems at the commune, there loomed
the rapidly approaching final exams and the prospect of having to get a
job.
  Mr Watson was becoming worried by this very question. On one of his son's
rare visits home he invited him into the study for a heart to heart talk.
  "Isn't it time Jeffrey that you devoted some thought to the future?" he
began seriously. "I'd be the last one in the world to interfere with your
freedom, but all this political activity - is it doing you any good? It's
all very well now - you're just going through a stage - but if it goes on
too long it could have repercussions on your career."
  Jeffrey defended himself half-heartedly, but the unknown future when he
would have his Arts degree loomed over him now like a menacing black cloud.
  Then, a month before the exams, to cap everything off, Hannah announced
that she was having a baby.
  Jeffrey was simply flabbergasted when she told him. He had the feeling
that his life was turning into a nightmare.
  They argued until 3 in the morning about what to do. Hannah became quite
hysterical. She behaved in a very immature way. Naturally there was no question
of them keeping the baby or of getting married.  

