<sample>
	<id> L01 </id>
	


	<note> 2020 words </note>
	


	<source> Mud and Stars </source>
	


	<bl> By Robert Spicer </bl>
	

Ash walked into an onslaught when he arrived at the hospital for his next
session with Dr Love. Myra had him captive instantly. `You are not going
to believe this, Jack.'
  `I promise you, I will. What happened? Did you get someone?'
  `Someone, someone - Jack, there are four people living in my flat!'
  `What?'
  `A brother and a sister and two sisters came about the same time, they
were early. I mean, the phone never stopped ringing while they were there
even and I liked them all so much we just sat around talking and talking.
In the end we took the receiver off the phone to get some peace and someone
suggested getting a wine cask while we discussed who was to move in. It
was crazy. We did it. At 4 am on Sunday morning we were still all talking.'
  `So what did you decide?'
  `Everybody moved in and we're looking for a house for all of us to rent
and as soon as we can find one we're going to move in together.'
  `I don't believe it.'
  `I told you you wouldn't, didn't I? Jack, I have never had so much fun
in my life. We all get on so well. They all want to meet you and I told
them it won't be long before they can. You will come and visit, won't you?'
  `Of course. The quicker the better.'
  She laughed and then turned and looked out the window.
  `What do you think of the hair?' She did a pirouette to face him again.
She looked five years younger and very pretty.
  `Sensational,' he said. `God, you're nearly up to my standard.' They both
laughed.
  `All that seems a long time ago, doesn't it?'
  He nodded and asked, `What about your brother, have you seen him?'
  `Jack, I couldn't bring myself to ask him over but I did want to do something
you know, like you said, clean out all the cobwebs. I called him on the
phone, Jack. We talked for a long time. I told him I thought I understood
a little now. He said when his love and guilt grew strong enough that was
when he stopped. He didn't just forget me or not want me near him anymore.
He said when he left home it was because he loved me too much to keep doing
things. The only way was to leave home and find someone else but once we
were separated he just couldn't talk to me anymore even though he wanted
to. I believe him, Jack. I told him what you said, that in a way we were
like a divorced couple and it would always hurt us to see each other with
other people being close but we should stay good friends. He said he'd like
that and from now on that's what we'd be.' She looked down at her feet.
`So that's that, case closed, everything fixed.'
  Ash put out his hand and lifted up her chin and looked into her eyes.
`All your own work too. You know, Myra, anybody can give a bit of advice
but the trick is for the person themselves to put what they like the sound
of into effective action. That's what you did and I'm really proud of you.'
He ruffled her hair. `And let me tell you, it did me a lot of good talking
with you. I felt really good when I left here last time, so you see it's
been a two-way street.'
  `I guess it has, hasn't it?' She looked at him, smiled and turned away
quickly. `Well, he's in,' she said. `I'll see if he wants you yet.' She
went to the surgery door, knocked, poked in her head and said, `Jack Ash
here to see you, Doctor.' Then she beckoned him to go in. He winked at her
and walked into the doctor's surgery. Love leaned back in his chair to face
him as he sat down.
  `Well, what did you think of it?'
  `What? Think of what?'
  `The automatic writing I gave you to read.'
  `Oh, I haven't seen you for such a long time and so much has happened
that I wondered what you were talking about. I have read it but only the
once and I have to say that I thought you may have been writing in terms
that you have been taught or don't remember being taught and may have absorbed
just the same. Even stories told to you by aunts or grandparents as a child
and in a certain state - you open up a channel to those memories. Possibly
even extended genetic memories remembered through the generations.' Ash
paused and it was to Love's credit that he seemed to be giving serious
consideration to what he had said. He went on, `That's just my opinion,
Doctor, because I can't accept the doctrine of selective reincarnation.'
  `What do you mean, selective?'
  `Well, let's say twenty generations ago there were 200 million people
on Earth and now we have 4,000 million people and in another five generations,
if we haven't destroyed ourselves, there will be 8,000 million. That means
to me that there just aren't enough past lives to go around, in a spiritual
sense. But there are enough inherited memories, perhaps, and certainly
enough bedtime stories, so I find it a lot more rational to look in that
direction for a solution to the phenomena of Mozart and the others like
him, including yourself. I don't see how that detracts from the law of Karma
anymore that it detracts from the law of averages. I don't see how the
supernatural need necessarily be involved but that's not to say it isn't.'
  Love sat very still for what seemed like a long time. `So you think it
would have to be selective?' he asked. `A God-being, allocating past lives
to suitable human vessels to carry on the self-improvement process. That
is, if it has any basis in reality.'
  `Yes, if it has any basis in reality I believe that would follow.'
  `I intend to give what you've said a great deal of thought, Jack, and
thanks for being honest with me. I rather expected you would be a little
more impressed.'
  `Whatever the source, it is certainly intriguing.'
  `Where do you think your drive for self-improvement emanates from if it
has no spiritual imperative?'
  `I don't know. Maybe the load of guilt instilled in my early Christian
moral training became too heavy as life went by until I had to set the account
straight or die in the crossfire, or maybe it was just a rational process.
Does it matter?'
  `Perhaps it doesn't. But if it doesn't, aren't we just trying to treat
the symptoms here? You know, the manifestations of the condition with external
psychological ointments rather than finding the root of the crisis and treating
that with the drug of reality.'
  `No, I believe what we are doing is a sort of sorting process, psychological
data processing. Helping the computer get the encyclopedia of personal data
into proper perspective, something like that. I mean, that would have to
be the basis of most neurotic and stress problems surely, taking things
out of perspective?'
  `Yes, that is true to a great extent but subconscious suppression of certain
aspects of data can also throw the wheels of personality out of balance.
A little like the Vietnam War. The Americans could have won the war by
obliterating Vietnam from the face of the Earth. Due to other considerations,
however, they chose to fight with one hand tied behind their back so to
speak, almost on the other fellow's terms. Now, if the positive psychological
forces in a person's personality are similarly disadvantaged by subconsciously
sabotaging the information with which they have to deal, they have a great
deal more daunting a task in overcoming negative tendencies in respect
of inner conflicts, between guilt and self-respect, duty and self-interest,
self-appraisal and self-assurance, proper responsibility and the right to
pleasure and gratification. This, I believe, is a factor in your own stress
and tension and its physical manifestations in the form of welts, hives,
head bumps, itching and rashes.'
  `In what way? I don't think I understand you.' That particular example
annoyed Ash. `The Americans would have liked to obliterate Vietnam as they
did Hiroshima but this time they had the problem of not getting the Soviet
Union involved so they were restricted to conventional warfare. They knew
why they had to fight under a disadvantage.' Dr Love looked unconvinced.
  `You may analyse the position in that way but others may say that America's
sentimental love of fair play or immature concern over what the world may
think of her was, in fact, the Achilles heel. In your case, for example,
I believe you deliberately underemphasize the role your first wife played in
the destruction of your marriage and overemphasize the negative role you
played because you're the only one who is best equipped to take the blame
and handle it. In fact, I think this type of tendency is prevalent in your
way of dealing with many conflict situations. Because of this you give your
own mental processes an almost impossible job in repairing psychological
damage. For example, most people after a marriage break-up blame the other
party almost entirely for the whole shemozzle. There is a very good reason
for this. By doing so, they themselves survive emotionally. After some time,
when they have well and truly put themselves back together they will gradually
make certain allowances for the other partner until, in the fullness of
time, they can often become quite good friends. If, however, someone says,
&quot;I am so superior, or I believe I should be so superior, that the frailty
or venality of the partner is irrelevant&quot;, and therefore leaves himself
no alternative but to take all the blame on his far superior shoulders,
then, depending on how superior those shoulders  really are and depending
on how often he plays the scenario this way, one can have no real difficulty
in surmising, when his body fails to match strength with his determination
and his will to take the rap himself for all failed relationships and
enterprises, that it capitulates into a sea of hives and rashes. It is really
just screaming out, I surrender, I've had enough. Can you see that?'
  `Yes, but only to a degree. I'm always aware of the contribution other
people have made to those failures.' Ash hardly felt himself completely naive.
  `Of course, but can't you see that that information is usually filed in
the irrelevant basket? What does it matter what they did or didn't do? To
all intents and purposes they were irrelevant. You think you should have
been able to manipulate them more effectively so that they did not act in
a negative or damaging way. The fact that they did is just further proof
of a failure on your part to do a proper job on them. The conclusion,
therefore, is that you are to blame for their failings as much as your own.
Most people throw all the blame on to others to ensure they will survive.
Your personality prefers to take full responsibility for the lot, often quite
unfairly I'd suspect, and very egotistically. You are now carrying a
superhuman load of this type of rationalization and each new load of data
could be the straw that breaks the camel's back. Your self-concept is such,
that to change your willingness to shoulder the blame could be seen as just
another failure, almost the daddy of them all. For that reason, the cure
could be as damaging as the neurosis.'
  `Hardly a neurosis.'
  `Losing perspective in any area is neurotic. I would like to hear, for
example, what you believe your first wife did to destabilize the marriage
without any rationalization on your part.'
  `I think her actions were really only reactions and the kind of neurosis
you have described could only apply to much later in my life, not these early
events.'


</sample>
