By Tom Howard Bone  

  "You doan' hafta worry 'bout me no more, Mr. Howard!" Bone's
white teeth semaphored a dazzling smile. "I'm cured, man!"
  Didn't believe it of course. I waited patiently for the
sting.
  "You doan' believe me, Mr. Howard?" Eyes bright, ebony skin
shining with innocence.
  I shook my head. Emphatically. Bone is an instinct-for-
survival troublemaker. Had to be. A negro in whitey's paradise.
On the edge of every street-kid clique and clan. Tolerated as
a mascot, a novelty, he had to keep fresh. Nothing real bad of
course. Not so much law-bending as bouncing. Steal a dozen
tooth-picks while returning a diamond ring. Give me a sold-out
crim any day. Know where you stand with him. Catch him breaking
your foot, you can send him away for a year. Let Bone dance on
your toes, he'll be back tomorrow with a jugful of fleas!
  "It's real true, Mr. Howard. I'm not gonna trouble nobody no
more - not you, not the cops, nobody."
  You had to admire his ingenuity. I smiled. "Trying to throw
me off-guard, Bone? You're making me even more suspicious."
  "Suspicious of what, Mr. Howard?" Bone didn't try to put on
an innocent face. That was the trouble: - his face always
looked baby bovine. His cow-like eyes were alight with
eagerness to please, his lips pouting with friendliness. "I'm
givin' it to you straight, man. I don't need that shit no
more!"
  I stood up. "I'll believe this miracle when I see it, Bone.
Now if you're through wasting my time, there's a girl outside
who'd like me to find her a job. That's what I'm here for -
genuine kids - real advice - not squaring mischief-makers with
the cops!"
  He remained seated. "I mean it, Mr. Howard," he blurted
desperately. "I done reformed. I joined Beachies For Christ."
  I sat down. This was a new development. Bone never ran out
of surprises. "So what do you want me to do? Voice it from the
clouds?"
  "Why doan' you come along, Mr. Howard?"
  I stood up. "It never fails. Get religion, drink, gambling,
you-name-it, sign the pledge, and you want everyone else to
join up too! No, thanks!"
  Unperturbed, he continued to gaze up at me with those
unruffled, wide-open eyes. "You doan' fool me, Mr. Howard. No
more. Took me a long time to figure you out, man. But I reckon
I got you pegged."
  I sat down. A jack-in-the box. "Let's have the wisdom, and
then bye-bye!" I made a fluttering motion with my hand. "Got
a girl waiting."
  "An angle, right?" he asked eagerly.
  I resisted the impulse to stand up. "Yeah, yeah, I know, I
know. Everyone's got an angle."
  "What's yours, Jack?" Bone asked quickly.
  I smiled. Effusively. Warily. "Just here to help you kids."
  "Why, man?"
  I continued to smile, my lips straining with the effort.
"Just a natural do-gooder."
  Bone pursed his thick lips, shook his head slightly. "It
ain't for the money," he said slowly.
  "What money? I'm a bloody volunteer!" I was beginning to lose
patience.
  "Power?" Bone suggested quietly, as if talking to himself.
"There's many of us like power."
  "What bloody power?" I screamed.
  "Advice. Big man. Make or break. Kow-towin', wheelin', makin'
waves?"
  I smiled. "Yeah, maybe that's it, Bone." I stood up. "Now if
you'll bloody excuse me, got a nice girl waitin'." I was
picking up his damn elisions.
  "Seen Nicola lately?"
  I sat down. Fast. "Not lately," I said carefully.
  He shook his head. "Thought maybe that was it. You know." He
smacked his lips in a kiss.
  I laughed.
  He laughed too. Merrily. Two big boys enjoying a joke. A very
dirty joke.
  "You know the score, Bone," I said. I snapped my fingers.
"Muchee promisee, no delivery. I've only ever seen Nicola the
once."
  Bone stared at me in surprise. "Like five, man." (I read pity
in his face). "She talks, Jack."
  "Okay, five."
  Bone shook his head. Elaborately. "No, that ain't it either.
Reckon a man can do better places than Paradise."
  I stood up. "Money, power, girls - you've gone through the
bloody lot - and I'm through being needled -"
  "Religion?" he asked hopefully.
  "Hah!"
  "God?"
  I wasn't about to mock God. I held my mouth shut and walked
around Bone to open the door.
  Bone shook his head. Exaggerated dubiety. "Ever'one's got an
angle."
  "Maybe I don't have an angle." I held the door open. "Maybe
I'm just a natural, genuine-born eccentric," I proclaimed
triumphantly.
  "Okay, Jack." Bone rose from his seat. "Thought I'd just tell
you, Jack. Like I done reformed. Beachies for Christ." He was
gripping my lapel, gazing into my face earnestly. "Jack?"
  I tried to shake him off. "Stop bloody calling me Jack!"
  His liquid eyes assumed a look of transparent surprise. "Why
not, Jack?" he asked quietly, an urgent earnestness in his
voice, face, manner that lent him an overwhelming dignity.
  I closed the door, walked back to my desk, tossing up what
question to ask first: How long have you known? Who else have
you told? How did you find out?
  I asked the last.
  "Puzzled me, Mr. Howard. Not like the other guys. You know,
the big `P', watermelon, sniggers - I seen 'em all. You treat
me just like the rest."
  I stared at him, not understanding.
  "I doan' want the talkin' down. You know, that Bone, he's
jus' a ignorant nigger, he ain't very bright, he's rode with
half-weights. You treat me like all the rest. I didn't tell no-
one, Mr. Howard."
  "How did you find out?" I asked again.
  Bone smiled broadly. "I was in the library. Saw one of your
books"
  "You must be the only kid in Paradise. How did you know it
was me? No photo in the book."
  "A hunch, Mr. Howard. It was months ago, man. Easter!"
  "You've known all this time? and you haven't told a soul?"
  Bone shook his head, smiled. "You're not prejudiced, Mr.
Howard - the only whitey I know!"
  I looked him up and down. "I'm not prejudiced by the color
of a man's skin. Or the length of his power. I'm prejudiced
against other things," I started to pretend.
  "Poverty, disease?" he suggested quickly, his eyes
mischievous, mocking.
  I shook my head. "Just cripples and catholics."
  He smiled. "Yeah? Me too."
  I had to defend myself. "Zombies - that's what I'm against.
Used to be a catholic. Know what a soul-destroying, first-hand
.. " I shrugged. "Crippled minds, crippled bodies ... Ever
hear of a priest with one hand or half a toe, a hare lip, or
a yellow eye?" I shook my head. "Unblemished. I'm against all
religions. You really join Beachies for Christ?"
  Bone smiled. "Why doan' you come along, Mr. Howard?"
  "It's not a religion, more a way a life," I misquoted.
  "Yo' not agin Christ?"
  "No," I answered carefully, "I'm not against Christ."

  I wasn't so sure of David Lundin though. Maybe he wasn't
against Christ either. He was certainly for Reverend David
Lundin. Beachies for Christ, but it was Lundin's face and photo
on all the leaflets, Lundin's name on all the banners around
the church.
  This was in Southport of course. Churches are not allowed in
Paradise.
  Southport has a railway station, but no railway line to go
with it. North from the station in a triangle formed by High
Street and Scarborough, is the headquarters of Beachies for
Christ.
  You never heard such cheering and stomping. The place was
packed with exuberant old men and chorusing young kids - all
yelling, shouting, screaming:
  If you cannot preach like Peter, 
  If you cannot pray like Paul, 
  You can cry the love of Jesus, 
  And shout, "He died for all!"
  Finally, Reverend Lundin bounces up the pulpit, says a few
words repeated with minor variations for fifteen minutes, and
then to my surprise, Bone comes out from behind somewhere and
grabs hold of the mike. A renewed burst of cheering and
stamping. When it is half-quiet, Bone says, opening his eyes
and mouth real wide - swimming brown eyes, sail-cloth teeth -
"Glory be! Is all that stompin' and caterwaulin' for me?" And
some wag calls out, "Well it sure ain't for Father Christmas,
brother!" This gets a big laugh, but Bone smiles and says, "I
reckon some of youse out there know me. To those that don't,
you can call me `Brother Bone'. Matter of fact this here nigger
don't bring a mind what you call him - so long as it's in the
bounds of the Lord! I been called a lot o' names in my time.
My friends call me Bone, my mammy called me a no-good, no-
account, lazy nigger, my pappy call me a sassy skinbag and mah
brothers all call me man - `Hey man!' I'm the man with the bones,
the man with the skins! And the eyes and the hair - But the
name I like best is the name the Lord Jesus done give me -
king! prince! duke! He takes one look at me and He says, `Hail
king!' And I says, `Hail to you, Lord Jesus!' And He says,
`Hail to you, Lord Bone!' And I says, `Hail to you, King Jesus
- top that one if you can!' And He says, `You got it all
backwards, brother! You're the king in this here heavenly army.
And the duke and the general and the captain, too.' So I said,
`You better go easy there, Lord Jesus, and leave some room for
some of these other niggers. They might want to be top
sergeants or privates first class.' And Jesus says, `They's all
here generals in this here army, brother. They's all chiefs and
no indians!' Glory be! `We don't need no indians,' He says, `We
all march to one banner, we all sing to one song!' Glory be to
the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Amen?"
  "Amen!" shouted the crowd.

  Amen! This nigger's been called a lot of names in his time.
I was born in Basin Street. You all know where Basin Street is?
That's right. In New Orleans. Man, there's a place that knows
its niggers. And this here nigger was right down the bottom of
the heap. You know, niggers in Basin Street are rated lower
than a dead Eskimo. I was so far down I thought I was livin'
in a crack like a weavil or a bug. Right at the top of the heap
was the high yallers. You know, the niggers that had up and
married with the French. The offspring They didn't
mix with us no-account niggers. They'd spit out their tongues
as they brushed by us on the street and they'd cry out, "Get
out of mah way, you filthy low-down nigger!" And they'd teach
their children to jeer at our kids at school. Man, you think
you got prejudice! Ain't no-one more hide-bound than a high
yaller. It was like livin' in enemy country, in occupied
territory, man! You had to keep an eye peeled over your neck
all the time, for if one of them skulkin' high yallers caught
you 'lone in some alley, it was goodbye teeth, hello crutches!
Many's the time I been beat up. Was mah own fault for gettin'
distracted. One time I 'member I was chasin' a blue-tongue,
'nother time I was beatin' a stomp in mah head. Man, mah head
was sure stomped!
  And so we all went, all in our own little ghettos where you
don't cross no lines till you get up to that big ghetto in the
sky. Oh yeah, that's some ghetto, brothers and sisters!
There'll be no crossin' the tracks up there 'tween the lost and
the saved. There'll be no earnin' the right to move from one
side t'other! No sir!
  Anyway, I fell in with some real smart niggers. They had
plans to change the whole thievin' system - they said! 
 
