By Leon le Grand  

Bodai was completing some mathematical calculations to establish the Yume no
kuni's latitude and longitude. He put down his quill and beckoned Robinson
towards him. When Robinson was close by Bodai spoke softly in Portuguese.
  `Aren San, you be careful of Toju. He has always disliked you and
consequently you'll never be safe while he's around. For heaven's sake don't
upset him. I feel it is inadvisable for me to push in and go ashore; I'll stay
on the ship. So unfortunately I won't be with you to offer any protection, so
be careful ... Give him his head, don't argue.'
  Robinson nodded. `Thank you, Bodai San. I appreciate your advice and I feel
it's well-founded.'
  The small bay was about five miles long by two miles wide. The ship was
anchored five hundred yards from the shore and about two and a half miles from
what appeared to be the entrance to a river. Toju directed the men to row
towards the mouth.
  The water was calm. Robinson could not remember having experienced such heat
and humidity. It was very unpleasant.
  The skies were alive with waterfowl and birdlife. A flock of ducks took off
from the edge of the bay, swept along the horizon in an arc, and resettled
further down the shoreline. Robinson noticed some other strange birds, bright
red, green and yellow which flew past them screeching noisily.
  Most of the shoreline was heavily wooded. A few small clearings indicated
that the land rose steeply in the background. Robinson counted four faint wisps
of smoke slowly ascending into the cloudless sky.
  Toju ordered the men ashore on the small sandy spit ahead. The boat went
aground a few feet short of the waterline. Toju didn't remove his sandals. He
stepped out of the boat into about eighteen inches of water and walked proudly
up the beach. He beckoned the men to follow him and to pull the boat securely
onto the beach.
  From inside his jacket Toju withdrew the scroll and read the formal
proclamation.
  `You,' he said, pointing to one of the Samurai. `Bring the mon from the
boat.'
  The Samurai returned with a flag bearing the Tokugawa insignia. At Toju's
signal he drove the stake into the ground, at a spot well above the watermark.
The bottom part of the cane broke off, much to Toju's annoyance. He instructed
the Samurai to sharpen the end with his knife and to try again.
  `I shall call this bay Kunike-Wan, after the broken flagstick incident,' Toju
declared solemnly. `You,' he contiued, pointing to another Samurai. `Bring the
plaque from the boat.'
  The golden piece of timber was some three feet long and about a foot wide. It
was sheathed in gold metal, with the Japanese inscription beaten into it. Toju
instructed the man to hammer the plaque onto a large tree growing on the slope.
The long sharp nails fixed the plaque firmly to the ancient wood. At Toju's
instruction all the Samurai gave a loud cheer.
  It was Robinson who first caught the glint of white teeth through the dense
undergrowth. He reached for his pistols, and at the same time alerted Toju.
  `Toju San, look. Natives, they're armed!' he hissed quietly, alarm in his
voice.
  In a split second, three of the dark faces had edged forward. The Samurai
archers simultaneously drew arrows from their quivers and stood ready.
  `Wait!' Toju yelled to his men in a short, gruff command. 
  The two groups stood staring at each other. Toju beckoned the three natives
towards him.
  `Come, come,' he said softly, gesturing with his hand towards himself.
  The three men, black as charcoal, stood rooted to the spot. Several more
faces emerged from the undergrowth. None of them wore a stitch of clothing. Two
of them had a small bone, several inches long, pierced through their nose just
above the lip.
  Without warning, the first three spontaneously launched sharp pointed spears
towards the Japanese.
  The Samurai archers responded quickly. The arrows whisked through the air.
The three natives dropped to the ground, their arms and feet thrashing. Their
screams subsided to deep grunts as they reached their last agonizing moments;
then they lay still.
  As the Samurai advanced they could hear the rest of the group crashing
through the scrub as they ran to safety. The first Samurai to reach the three
bodies decapitated them. Toju ordered that stakes be cut and driven into the
sand. The Samurai complied immediately. The three heads were left hanging from
the top of the stakes as a warning to the other natives.
  The savagery revolted Robinson, who found some difficulty in stopping himself
from vomiting.
  `Come on men,' Toju ordered. `Back to the boat.' Six Samurai set to the oars,
while the others kept their muskets cocked, prepared to fire at an instant's
notice. But none of the spears thrown by the natives succeeded in reaching
them.
  Toju stood at the bow of the boat, giving orders to the crew. The lush green
foliage grew profusely along the swampy river bank.
  The rocky valley was deeply faulted, its V-shaped floor bedded down on huge
granite blocks, which had eventually formed a waterfall. Torrents of water
cascaded down some thirty feet into the crystal clear rock pools below. Toju
pointed to a pebbly beach.
  Toju ordered half the men to bathe in turn, while the others kept watch.
  `You and I will go in when they come out,' he said to Robinson.
  Robinson tasted the water. It was fresh and sweet, and would be ideal to fill
the ship's barrels.
 `Come, Aren San. We will rest out of the sun under these trees,' Toju said as
he pointed to two enormous trees towering over the edge of the river.
  Robinson felt uneasy. It was the way Toju kept looking at him. He took off
his shirt and washed it in the river. Why did he have to wait to have a swim?
He knew Toju only too well. I won't give him the reason or the opportunity, he
thought.
  Hanging his shirt over a low branch of the tree, he suddenly froze in total
shock. There was no time to move, or even flinch. Toju's deadly two-handed sword
cut through the air, the blade flashing in the sun.
  Robinson's eyes closed automatically, resigned to death. Before the blade had
completed its arc Toju emitted a battle cry. His armed Samurai ran towards him.
  Robinson staggered back in suspended animation, the shock deep,
instantaneous. The blood had drained from his face. After Toju returned his
sword to the scabbard, he stood hands on hips triumphantly claiming victory.
  The head of a monster snake as thick as a man's arm lay on the ground, the
seven-foot headless body lashing about in uncoordinated sweeps.
  Robinson staggered backwards. His eyes were fixed as if in a trance. He
tripped on a small rock and fell into the shallows of the river. He sat up in
swirling water and began to laugh in nervous release as the terror subsided.
  `Come on, Aren San,' Toju said enthusiastically. `I'll get my men out of the
water and you and I can have a swim. You look like you need it.'

After swimming around for a few moments Toju pointed to a ledge halfway between
the waterfall and the river. He climbed up the rockface carefully, then
balanced on his toes and perfected a neat dive into the water, barely making a
splash behind him. The twelve Samurai cheered him on, encouraging him to dive
again. Toju bowed to them politely and executed another dive, this time
including a forward somersault.
  Robinson had never seen such precision diving before. As the men's cheers
rang through the trees in the narrow rocky valley, white birds with pink
plumes squawked loudly as they took off and circled overhead.
  Toju swam over to Robinson.
  `I've never seen such beautiful birds,' he said. `Such variety.'
  `You seem very happy, Toju,' Robinson replied. `I felt there was some
hostility between us,' he added, cautiously.
  Toju's expression changed to a frown. `Well, there was. I'm not sure that you
understand our ways. When you saved my life I owed you a debt, a debt I
couldn't repay. One must always reciprocate with a gift of equal value. In
saving your life today, I managed to accomplish that. So you see, your life can
be spared.'
  Robinson was astonished. It had been a day of terror and tribulation. He felt
a mixture of emotions emerging.
  As he left the water Toju gave instructions to his men.
  `Now you six can go in. I want you to get the casks out of the longboat and
fill them with water. Give them a rinse first. You,' he continued, pointing to
the Samurai nearest him. `Don't start undressing yet, wait until the others
have put on their clothes and armed themselves.'
  `Hai, Toju San,' the man said respectfully, bowing towards him.
  `Come Aren San, I have a small surprise. I've brought along a small cask of
sake. I didn't feel like celebrating when we needed to kill the natives. I do
not enjoy killing, but it was essential to establish order from the outset,'
Toju said, his voice indicating a strong sense of duty and responsibility.
  He went to the beached boat, collected a small cane cask with a wooden
stopper and two small handleless cups.
  `We'll go under those trees over there,' he declared. `You check for snakes
and animals.'
  Robinson laughed. `You'd have to be kidding, I won't even squat on the ship's
deck without looking behind me. I'm sure I'll be like that for the rest of my
life.'
  Toju gave a short gruff laugh and strutted towards some gnarled gum trees,
out of sight of the dead snake.
  It took some time to fill the wooden casks. The crew rolled the casks over to
the longboat, methodically placing them so as not to put the boat out of
balance, and then returned to the water.
  Toju and Robinson sat in the shade of the trees.
  `Here, Aren San, have some sake.'
  `Here's to the new Japan - the country of "Tokugawa",' Robinson said
ceremoniously. `It's an old English custom to propose such toasts and drink to
them.'
  `Oh well, let's drink to it then,' Toju replied, downing the sake in one
gulp. He then proceeded.
  `No doubt Aren San, this is the land of plenty. I've never seen such
excellent fishing waters, so many varieties, including the giant prawns. I have
no doubt this land will produce good crops; it is also ideal for rice. The
temperature is excellent. From the foliage we've seen growing along the coast,
the soil must be very fertile.'
  `Perhaps we'll take a party inland soon Toju San?'
  `Yes, that's an excellent idea. We could climb up to a high spot and get a
better overall view.'
  `I was thinking about that ...'
  A terrifying scream brought the laughter and idle chatter from Toju's men to
a halt. Robinson and Toju stood up, endeavouring to see what had caused it.
  Toju's gruff commanding voice bellowed over the water.
  `Who screamed? What's happening?'
  Five Samurai battled their way across the water towards the beach near Toju
and Robinson. Breathless, the first two clambered over the stones in Toju's
direction and stopped in front of him shaking in terror.
  `Toju San, it was awful. It was a huge dragon, and it's taken Toba San in its
jaws.'
  `How big was this monster?' Toju asked disbelievingly.
  `I'd say it was three times my height,' one of the men replied. `It's eyes
were two feet apart, its mouth and enormous teeth like nothing I've ever seen.'
  `I don't believe such monsters exist,' Toju said to Robinson.
  `We're in a very strange country. May I ask some questions Toju San?'
  `Yes of course, if you can get to the bottom of this mystery.'
  `What colour was its skin? Describe it to me in detail please.' 

