<sample>
	<id> L14 </id>
	


	<note> 2008 words </note>
	


	<source> Unsettled Areas </source>
	


	<h> Daisy </h>
	


	<bl> By Sally Bennett </bl>
	

It was Thursday. I didn't want to go home. I walked slowly and dangled my
school bag so that it gently scraped against the surface of the footpath.
Then I saw them. The woman, tall and walking with a spring in her step.
She was pushing a pram, a high-riding one with large wheels like you see
in English movies. A little girl with blonde curls hugging her pretty face
danced beside her. Seeing them made me feel kind of strange and helpless.
I don't, even now, know why because normally I can handle anything. Anything,
that is, except Thursday afternoons.
  On Thursday there is nothing to hurry home for. Mum works late at the
shop and Glen goes to the pub after he finishes at the factory. More often
than not he comes home drunk. He yells at me or cuffs me around the ears
and calls me names. I get him something to eat - usually a fried egg sandwich
which is my speciality. Sometimes he says it smells like sheep's piss and
throws it at me. Other times he eats it sullenly, changes his clothes and
goes out again. `I'm goin' ta get laid, creep features,' he will say with
an ugly laugh which shows his tarnished broken teeth. `You can tell ya Mum
if ya like.' But he knows I won't.
  Nothing has been right since Glen came to live with us. I've got to be
careful what I say about him to Mum though. Glen has been poisoning her
against me and she thinks I'm making things up about him just to get him
out of the place. She knows I hate him. I think it makes her feel guilty
because she doesn't look at me anymore. Glen has been poisoning her about
my face too. `The kid gives me the creeps with that bloody eye of hers,'
he often says to her. He says nobody in his right mind would want me around.
Sometimes Mum looks like she wants to tell him to stop. Her mouth opens
and closes like a goldfish in a bowl. Nothing comes out though. I suppose
she is frightened of losing him.
  I went as close as I could to the little family. I could hear the woman's
voice. It was clear and light. She seemed to come from a world quite different
from mine. She smiled at her little girl and looked adoringly into the pram
from time to time. I wished I could have been in that pram.
  Eventually she stopped outside a neat white house and I knew that I would
have to make my move or lose them forever.
  `Hello,' I said brightly, running up to them. I turned the good side of
my face towards the woman.
  She spun around and smiled. Her face was so gentle it hurt me. The afternoon
sun shone through her chestnut hair like a fiery halo.
  `Your little girl is very pretty. How old is she?' I really wasn't interested
in the child though.
  `She's nearly three. And you?'
  `I'm ten. Can I come and play with her?'
  The woman looked startled and I could have kicked myself for being so
forward. I knew it put people off me.
  `What's your name?' she asked.
  `Amanda. Amanda de Vere,' I lied.
  `That's a pretty name,' she said. She didn't smirk or look suspiciously
at me. Maybe she even thought it suited me. I loved her for that.
  `Well, Amanda, won't your mother be expecting you home?'
  `She doesn't get home till after nine - she works in a shoe shop. I'm
alone till then. But she doesn't mind if I play with friends after school.'
  The woman was silent. I could tell she felt uneasy. I turned my bad side
towards her. I suppose I was hoping that it would make her feel sorry for
me. She didn't flinch - sometimes people do. As Glen would say, it's not
a pretty sight. My left eye is blind. The muscles are useless and pull the
dead eye in so that it stares at the bridge of my nose. The cheekbone
underneath is a mess as well; sort of sunken in like someone gave me a bunch
of fives. Mum says I was born like that. She says it wouldn't have happened
if my father hadn't beaten her up when she was pregnant.
  `You can come in for a few minutes then,' she said, but the lightness
had gone from her voice.
  Her house was clean and brightly coloured. It was a warm and happy place
and right away I felt I belonged there, I felt I'd come home at last. I
ran my hand over the furniture. The woman smiled at me kindly.
  `Would you like a drink?' she asked.
  The little girl was a real pest. She kept tugging at my legs, pulling
my dress and wanting me to play. All I wanted to do was sit on the stool
at the breakfast bar and drink my lemonade and pretend I lived there.
  We chatted awhile. The woman kept asking me about my mother, about her
work and my being alone. I told her about my parents splitting and that
really cut her up. But I didn't say anything about Glen. I couldn't bring
myself to mention his name. It would have spoiled the whole afternoon.
  The baby woke up. The woman leant over the pram and lovingly scooped up
the tiny thing. Its head was covered with chestnut down. It looked like
a baby squirrel squirming in her arms.
  `Can I hold it? What's its name?' I asked.
  She looked at me apprehensively.
  `Daisy,' she said at last. `She wants feeding but you can nurse her for
a few minutes. Wash your hands first thought.'
  I looked at my hands. They looked clean to me. I sniffed them.
  `I make everyone wash their hands first,' she explained. `I'm a bit of
a fusspot, I suppose.'
  All the same it made me feel dirty and I was ashamed of my dusty shoes
and the grass-stained uniform I'd worn for several days. It made me feel
unwelcome too, as surely as if she had picked me up and hurled me out of
the back door.
  The baby felt like a helpless animal in my arms. It burrowed its little
head into my chest and made snuffling noises. The woman stood over me, ready
to pounce, I thought, if I dropped the baby. Her face looked tired and tight
suddenly.
  `I shall feed her now,' she said and made to take her away. 
  `Can't I give her a bottle?' I asked. I really didn't want to give the
baby back. I was sure she would never let me nurse Daisy again.
  `She doesn't have bottles. She's breast fed.'
  The woman sat in a chair and opened her blouse. The baby took the huge
brown nipple in her tiny rosebud mouth. To tell the truth, it repelled me.
  I half-heartedly played with the little girl. What an annoying kid she
was. She wanted my attention all the time when it was the baby I wanted
to play with. The woman held Daisy close to her and I knew there was no
room for anyone else. I feld sad and heavy and ugly.
  `I'll come back tomorrow,' I said as I left. The woman looked up. She
murmured something but I could tell she was not too thrilled with the idea.

  The house smelled of old burnt toast from breakfast and Glen's strong
and spicy aftershave. I was glad he was going out. I tried to creep into
my room but he heard the back door close.
  `Is that you, kid?' he shouted. `Get me somethin' ta eat. Real quick.'
I put the package under my bed and went into the kitchen to make him a
sandwich. Dishes from that morning sprawled over the sink. It was an ugly
sight.
  `Hey kid, answer me,' he said and came into the kitchen half-dressed.
He was no beauty, I can tell you. He had a mean little face with small pale
eyes which became microscopic behind the thick lenses of his glasses. I
can't understand why Mum is frightened of losing him.
  `Answer me, you ugly bitch,' he snarled and kicked my bottom with his
foot. I ignored him and put the sandwich on the table. It was one of those
old mottled green laminex tables with a chrome edging and plenty of stale
food caught in between.
  `Who ya bin scarin' today?' He laughed and sunk his filthy teeth into
the bread. I went to my room and closed the door. I could hear him shouting
abuse at me and I sang to myself to drown it out. Finally he left. From
my window I watched him get into his car and drive off. I had to make sure
that I was quite alone.
  I got down an old airline travel bag from the top of my wardrobe. It was
dusty and a bit smelly but it would do. Just the sight of it made me feel
sad. The last time I'd used it was when Timmy died. His black hair was still
on the crumpled towel which lay in the bottom. I hated doing it but I got
rid of the last traces of Timmy and cleaned the bag thoroughly.
  Then I got out my doll Amanda. It had been ages since I had played with
her. She had been given to me when I was really small and I had been frightened
of her because she was bigger that I at the time. One side of her face was
broken. I had smashed it with a hammer to see what I must look like to others.
  She fitted snugly into the bag so it would do. I took her out, gave her
a hug and threw her aside. I had outgrown dolls. I folded one of my dresses
and laid it on the bottom of the bag. Then I put the bag under my bed. It
knocked against something and I peered under to see what it was. It gave
me quite a start to see the package. For a moment I didn't know what it
was or why it was there. It was a strange feeling. One part of me remembered
going to the chemist and later shoving the package under the bed while the
other part of me knew nothing about it. That sort of thing happened to me
quite often.
  I was restless and kind of depressed. I thought that it was because of
the bag and thinking about Timmy again. So I went outside and sat by the
rainwater tank and kicked at the dry earth. Somewhere beneath Timmy lay.
  He was my dog. He and I would go for long walks and I could talk to him
endlessly. He knew exactly what I was saying and he didn't mind a bit about
my appearance. He would lick my face when I can home from school and the
two of us would chase each other around the backyard for hours on end. One
morning I found his little body trembling in the gutter. His eyes were open
and blood was slowly seeping from his mouth. Mum and Glen were already at
work. I didn't know what to do. I ran inside and grabbed Glen's airline
bag. I carefully laid Timmy inside it. He jerked violently and then lay
still. I knew he was dead. I didn't go to school that day but kept watch
over his body as it lay in the bag. Glen was really mad when he came home.
He beat me up and blackened my good eye. I buried Timmy under the tank-stand
that evening. Glen wouldn't take his bag back. He hated Timmy almost as
much as he hated me and he was really spooked by death.  

  The following day I went around to the white house again.


</sample>
