Last exit to Laguna Beach By Barry Westburg  

  He wakes up by stages, climbing out of dream within dream. He is surprised
to find he's still alive - for in one of his dreams he was blown away -
murdered. The Jewish Toy Merchants of San Francisco, losing patience with
him for not finishing everything on schedule, had sent a woman. Sure, they
knew it was not his fault, but they were losing thousands of dollars every
day that production of the COPYCAT was held up. It was time somebody was
taught a lesson. She had rubbed him out in a most considerate way. Still,
he didn't like having to die.
  But he wakes up to a bad dream, too, only it's called Reality - which
is to say, a bad dream with all the continuity written in. And ... there's
a girl beside him. His ex-prizefighter's instincts tell him it's not his
wife - she's back in Scarsdale for a few days ... weeks ... months. The
pressure on her was getting a bit much. A professor's daughter who did honours
classics at Swarthmore could not be expected to thrive in the world of
business. That's why Brad had resigned his Vice-Presidency on the East Coast
- in a very big concern - and moved to California. If nothing else the climate
would do her some good. Anyway, they'd buy a place with a pool and lie in
the sun. But the competition on the West Coast was unbelievable. He'd done
a bootstraps operation and set up a little engineering concern from scratch.
A few of his best boys from the East had been talked - bribed - into following
him West.
  Braintree, the best plastic fabrications man on the East Coast, led the
gang who'd made the big shift. They all were a little afraid of California.
It was like being at a jungle outpost on the edge of darkness. So they all
bought houses on the same street in Laguna Beach. That way they could keep
in close touch, day and night. They were going to stay a team. 
  Before they were able to get furniture in their houses, or grass seed
down (or chlorine in their pools) they were hard at work. They began by
designing assembly lines for small manufacturing concerns and then they
got into installation of assembly lines and then they decided, what the
hell, they might as well jump into manufacturing one hundred per cent. They
knew plastics like nobody else in town.
  So they started a few product lines on contract from certain retailers.
The company name changed from BRANSTETTER ENGINEERING to BRADFAX.
  At first circumstances conspired to help BRADFAX get off the ground. It
so happened that Brad's wife had some old school friends in Southern
California. Once debutantes, they were now single professional women, forming
a close knit group, into radical politics and heavy feminism. (One day Brad
had to pick up Charlotte at Jane Fonda's house, but he had avoided going
in - he just waited outside, revving the Pinto. Before his wife came to
his rescue, he was hassled by Fonda's security guard.)
  And then the contracts started rolling in - from Charlotte's friends,
in fact. The first ones: bubble packages for motivational cassettes (So
You Want to Help: Woman's Guide to Minority and Third World Investment
Packages) and plastic buttons printed with slogans (Women who Strive to
be Equal with Men lack Ambition). After a time, more fringe groups in Southern
California were using BRADFAX for their promotional materials. For instance,
the Chicano Community Festival commissioned BRADFAX to make half a million
plastic tortillas, stamped with revolutionary slogans, and equipped with
the aerodynamic properties of the frisbee. Some of these floated as far
as Laguna Beach, to the dismay of the little team, who felt compromised
by their new vocation. After all, they were conservative elitists.
  And then Braintree disappeared, with a hundred fifty thousand bucks, and
the heady winking noon wine all turned to vinegar.

  Brad rolls over and the girl stirs. She's young and ... good God, he
recognizes her! She's Braintree's eldest daughter (Midge, Mamie?) He had
sent her a Sweet Sixteen present when they still lived in the East. She
throws a well-tanned leg over his thigh. California changes your life.
  Later, after she has gone, the phone rings. It is Brennbaum himself, the
Toy Merchant. Brennbaum always means business. A guy named Cozy Cousins
vanished last year and the disappearance was laid by almost everyone at
Brennbaum's door. Then Cozy's ... uh ... remains were found lashed to a
paling on Laguna pier - and they were very untidy. Lots of not-so-nice things
had been done to Cozy before he had finally snuffed it. The Coroner's Inquest
of course ruled it death by suicide. When Brennbaum's toy business suffers
other people got to suffer, too.
  Okay, so maybe Brad's just being paranoid. Maybe Brennbaum is harmless,
just an irascible old bee-jeeper and heaps of malicious folks are talking
out of the wrong sides of their mouths. Sure, sure!
  Brennbaum - a.k.a. `The Philosopher' - reputedly knows the works of Sartre
and Camus by heart. Reputedly subscribes to a highly idiosyncratic theory
of Reincarnation based on mathematical concepts of Probability. A self-styled
authority on what he calls the `Big Picture'. In short, a dangerous man.
  - Listen, schmuck, how come you always keep on the wrong side of the
metaphorical shithouse door, Brennbaum hisses, over the phone. And that's
not a question, by the way. And now you make another mistake and you climb
into a little blonde shiksa. Not to worry, not to worry - she's clean. She
just told me all about it on the phone, in tears. What kind of a man are
you? Just because her father crossed you. What is more, she thinks she loves
you, even though I paid her to surrender her sweet little tocus to you.
So now I take her off the case, send her back to Bryn Mawr to study Business
Ethics. May I tell you the story ...
  - Brennbaum, excuse me but I can't help feeling paranoid, I told you that
the girl's father absconded, defaulted on me, left me a hundredfifty K in
the hole and I've found no way to finish rewiring the assembly line. I got
to scare up some money to cover the short-term costs. Otherwise, they won't
even turn on the electricity at the Laguna Plant! How else are we going
to get the COPYCATs into production? For chrissakes, Brennbaum, try to see
my side for two minutes!
  - In two minutes I can tell you a story, kid. About how they took the
flea-ridden cur which was given unto them and they dressed it and they called
upon the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying O Baal, hear
us. But there was no voice, not any that answered ...
  - Brennbaum, forgive me but I don't see what you are getting at. Braintree,
my best man, has left me, absconded, and I wake up with his daughter this
morning and ask myself what she is doing here! I'm a happily married man.
  - And they leapt upon the altar which was made, Brennbaum said. And it
came to pass at noon that the Prophet mocked them, and said cry aloud for
he is a god; either he is waiting, or he is pursuing, or he is on a journey
... on a journey, my friend!
  - Brennbaum, it is already the middle of the day. I have bad dreams, and
I can't even sleep right anymore. I miss my loving wife in Scarsdale, and
if the pressure doesn't ease off soon I can't meet any of my obligations.
I have been living on Ricco's pizza Special for six months and I've put
on a small but noticeable potbelly and I can't find time for jogging anymore.
The neighbours are getting suspicious of my lifestyle, and then somebody
sends that young kid over. And then ... and then Ricco puts too many anchovies
in his pizza and the salt is raising my blood pressure!
  - And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives
and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them ...
  The phone goes dead.
  Brad faces another day of trying to wriggle out of his little spot. He
can either get the assembly line cranking or ... or take the long walk.
  Think about it, though. Isn't it basically a matter of getting the rewiring
done real soon? But of course that takes money - in round terms forty thousand
bucks! His options are pretty minimal. Like, he could try to rent out his
two empty warehouses in Santa Monica. He'd worked on that idea night after
night, sitting in Ricco's pizza parlour, soaking up `the Beer that Made
Milwaukee Famous'.
  But Brad will need both warehouses if ever the assembly line does get
cranking. Which means that if he rents them out to somebody else right now
- in a matter of only a few weeks he will once again be up Old Bullhead
Creek. For who would rent a warehouse to him? He'd made exploratory phone
calls to other manufacturers but no dice, they said. BRADFAX was crashing
a game where they once called the shots. Let the Jewish Toy Merchants help
prune the competition. Like Cozy Cousins he would have the wear the suit.
That's showbiz, folks!
  The COPYCATs are already being advertised in the F.A.O. Schwartz Christmas
Catalogue and orders are pouring in. But nobody has seen anything yet but
the Prototype released for promotions. Braintree himself had made the Prototype
by hand so as to determine the assembly line parameters. It was left for
safekeeping with Brad. He had gone out one day for his usual run on the
beach with his dog Americk (o Americk!). Coming home he found that the
Prototype was missing! Howls from Brennbaum. Shock/horror reactions from
everybody else in the City. Braintree had preserved a prolonged silence
- contemplating his defection no doubt. That was the only Prototype. The
key to the assembly process!
  COPYCAT is, well, the ultimate toy. COPYCAT (whose precise formula is
a secret closely guarded by wise Toy Merchants in the City of San Francisco)
is light-years ahead of the computer, which merely relays to children the
thought-processes of adults. It is basically not much more than a stripped-down
three-dimensional solid-copying device, but it has the potential to make
kids independent of adults forever - almost. For COPYCAT will not copy itself
- and that is where BRADFAX comes into the picture.
  Small wonder, then, that Brennbaum offered a reward of twenty thousand
bucks, no questions asked, on the return of the Prototype, which, if it
fell into the wrong hands ...
  Bear in mind that, technically speaking, BRADFAX is involved only in
packaging COPYCAT. The high-tech bubble plastic container is itself a marvel
of design, and superficially COPYCAT is all container. The `contents', the
active ingredients, are supplied by the wise Toy Merchants at the bottom
of the assembly line, and BRADFAX doesn't know how they are made, if they
are `made' at all; BRADFAX merely reserves a region within the package for
the proprietary AM (`Ark Module' - so named in keeping with the Talmudic
interests of its distributors). The missing Prototype was, unfortunately,
primed with an AM.
  Brad drives into Laguna Beach for a midday pizza, racking his brain for
solutions. As he pulls up in front of Ricco's Pizza, he notices a kid standing
next to the parking meter. He gets out, carefully locks his Porsche, as
she approaches him.
  - Gee mister, that's a nice car. You used to run on the beach, didn't
you? With your dog. Then one day he ran away from home, didn't he? I know
what happened to him. Do you want to hear?
  Poor Americk! Wretched mutt! Brad had missed him that day after their
jog on the beach, had scoured the neighbourhood (for a few intense hours),
but had finally been too busy - hunting for the Prototype, in fact - to
continue the search.
                                                     
