<sample>
	<id> M02 </id>
	


	<note> 2004 words </note>
	


	<source> Omega Science Digest - Jan/Feb 1986 </source>
	


	<misc> Far out in space the colony waited for visitors from Earth. Waited ... and
waited ... </misc>
	


	<h> MEMORABLE STORY </h>
	


	<bl> By Freda McLennan </bl>
	

I WANTED to be at my desk, watching the far-distance scanners that had never
shown us any evidence of approaching life.
  I wanted life. And love, and companionship. Believe it or not, I even
wanted to quarrel.
  But I couldn't spend my life in front of scanners. It would be bad for
the residents and worse for me, and it was time for my visit to Village
A: time to walk down the street, breathe the air, feel the way things were
working. A day like any other day during my Initiative.
  It's a stable and pleasant village. They have always had a reliable range
of adjustments and counter-adjustments. They keep their houses well, the
roads are good, they maintain some industries. They grow some rather lovely
flowers, even some roses.
  There are roses and a smooth lawn under shady trees near my house. I could
relax there if I wanted, and perhaps drink some wine that my
great-great-grandmother laid down over a hundred years ago. Things were
- as I like them, but nothing was as I wanted it. 
  As usual there was nothing else on the helipad where I left my flyer.
There was a little minor land traffic, with residents soberly testing their
mobiles and the roads. Nothing to note particularly as I walked through
the central area and out towards my house.
  Some residents were gardening. A few others were painting their houses
in the great sweeping rainbow bands of colour that please them, but I was
more interested in the gardeners, diligently reshaping the lives of plants
and insects, earthworms and other small creatures. In a sense they were
not part of all those different lives, a new part of nature.
  It was true that no one was just sitting in a garden, reading or talking
with friends, and on such a day someone should have been. Or perhaps not.
Suburban gardeners may have always avoided each other.
  George would know, and would tell me, since lack of social activity was
the only reasonable criticism that I could make about Village A.
  If I made no criticism, or even offered a favourable comment, George might
be roused to try to entertain me - every walk interrupted by residents who
cut down trees or tore up flowering shrubs or threatened to destabilise
each other.
  Unreasonable criticism was tempting, of course, but it might destabilise
George. But perhaps he might expect me to behave erratically that day because
of, in the residents' terms The Other Thing.
  It was the end of a Fifteenth Year. My first Fifteenth Year since my father
went away.
  Within a few days I would have to open the grain stores and the refrigeration
chambers and throw away 10 harvests of grain, fruit, meat, honey, sugar,
oil and spices.
  Some of it would be ploughed into unproductive ground, some of it would
be thrown out for the wild creatures to eat (some of them have adapted to
eating foreign substances) and some of it would simply rot.
  Storage capacity had doubled and redoubled, but so had production. In
theory it should have been possible to store all of it in perfect condition
until someone came to use it, even if they didn't come for a thousand years.
But in practice something would break down in the system, and spoilage would
set in.
  And above all we had to keep a necessity for all the activity and planning
of production, to ensure that it would continue, however arbitrary and
artificial that necessity might be.
  Dealing with minimal necessity is the basic law of life here, the real
necessity behind the artificial one. My family realised it a long time ago,
when they first set up the rule of the Fifteenth Year.
  Minimal necessity is the reason why the residents do not entertain each
other or use flyers. It's the reason why they do not eat or drink or lie
on beds or sit on chairs, except to test them.
  They don't need beds or chairs, they don't need an energy supplement.
  All they need is to continue to exist and to be aware for as long as
possible, so they rigidly conserve energy and structure.
  When they finish their set tasks for their community or the living creatures
around them, they go into their houses and close the doors and windows and
stand unmoving and unthinking, simply aware, for 14 or 16 hours a day.
  Awareness - consciousness itself - is the pleasure beyond all pleasure
for them.
  And yet their thrift in activity makes no difference really. Unless some
catastrophe prevents them - some disturbance of the terms of their existence
which we have not anticipated - they will continue to function perfectly
for five or even six thousand years.
  Minimisation of activity won't extend that period by more than weeks or
months, since their enemy is not friction or attrition, but the infinitely
slow crystallisation of their structure.
  But in a parody of life, something drives them to extend their possible
existence by the only means open to them. The only thing that makes them
extend their activity beyond a minimum is regular co-operation with a human
being, which is not available to most of them.
  George and his colleagues work serenely by day and by night, responding
to me and to the complexity and variation of their administrative work.
But all the other residents insistently minimalise activity. Even the most
responsive of them, livestock workers constantly adjusting to animal needs
and predictably erratic behaviour, even they achieve minimal activity by
rostering themselves for lengthy alternating rest periods.
  &quot;How very human,&quot; my mother used to say, laughing.
  And they are very human. When I was learning to program, and to initiate,
I asked my grandfather why they were always programmed in human form. He
didn't really answer me, but I suppose it's because of the intellectual
and emotional commitment we all put in to programming each of them - a new,
free-moving intelligent creature, with the capacity to survive for more
than five thousand years. To create them in human form was the final, complete
commitment to seriousness in what we did.
  It's fortunate for me now, of course. Humanity keeps me company, or at
least some aspects of humanity. And it might be going to survive for five
thousand years after me. But perhaps not. They themselves believe that they
need me to initiate new programs.
  Reality keeps changing while they do not change of themselves and even
our best programming cannot anticipate the constant, splendid unreasonableness
of the way living things and living conditions find new ways to change.
The Other Thing.
  If I died, or otherwise lost my Initiative, George and his colleagues
might originate new, change-matching Human Beings from the cell banks, where
every one of the Fourteen Founders and their descendants had left cells.
It had been done before.
  I probably wouldn't do it, for the same reason that my parents had not.
Not even when they knew I was going to be left, quite alone.
  At one time there were 40 human beings on this planet. Forty.
  And when I was a child almost the entire human population was wiped out
in various ways including disease, accident and stupidity. And a genetic
weakness of some kind.
  I inspect the human cell banks regularly, but every time I walk into the
vaults I think of my young cousins, their clever, anxious, sickly little
faces. Please God, never again.

ERROL is probably the one I remember best. He hated me.
  My other cousins were a little older, and kind to me with the rather anxious
kindness they showed each other. When I climbed a tree or fell down a hill
or picked up my father's gun and nearly shot myself, they reacted with a
kind of amused pride that anything human could be so wrong-headed and live.
  But Errol sat with a pinched look because he couldn't climb trees and
didn't have enough energy to go into the gardens or safe parks. He put a
lot of time and ingenuity into making trouble for me, including appealing
pathetically for my company and my non-existent sympathy.
  They couldn't make me put up with him. Or make me understand why he could
have almost anything he wanted.
  I remember being dragged into a &quot;party for Errol&quot; where they had made
him my favourite kind of cake, and he was smirking at me from a place beside
my mother.
  My father told me to apologise to Errol for some fault, real or imagined,
and slapped me in exasperation when I refused. The shame of being beaten
in public was the last straw. Suddenly I didn't care about any of it any
more, and I stopped crying and stared at all of them, including mother.
  &quot;I'm not sorry. All he does is make trouble for me. Why should I be sorry
for him?&quot;
  Everyone in the world looked at me, ruefully or disapprovingly, and the
silence should have been terrifying. But I had had enough. And that was
that. &quot;Bitch,&quot; said Errol, and tried to throw his plate at me. But he couldn't.
  They sat in silence a moment longer, and then my mother's father got to
his feet. &quot;That might be what it takes in this world,&quot; he said drily. &quot;Laura
you'd better take your daughter to her room.&quot;
  For the Unit, this night provided an ideal opportunity. Baker would show
them havoc.
  He had a similar interest in watching Glass Reptile Breakout live, but
his own researches into biofeedback technique and its attendant miracles,
unlike the Inquiry's, were not public. Indeed, they were not even known
to the State government. Which did not mean that less rested on them. The
Inquiry's recommendations were limited to this one State. Yet whatever checks
it demanded on the use of the miracle-inducing equipment in Victoria - and
Baker intended that the ruling would be the unexpected one of total abolition
- his own involvement had a significance extending well beyond Victoria,
would benefit the entire Free World. His American and Chinese colleagues
were particularly eager to restrict public access to equipment and techniques
which created the BF-miracles.
  Officers of the Signals Unit were compiling a list of Australian leaders
who were suspected latents. It was part of an international intelligence
effort for the benefit of democracy. Eventually even small fry like Alderson
and Loerne would be tested against the Unit's criteria. Baker looked forward
to seeing the final list. Once established, it would enable his researches
to take on a very practical use. Latents, such as the flick-dancer in his
high cage, were potentially so vulnerable.
  Baker slapped another pair of two dollar coins down. He stared through
the gaunt feather-cheeked young barman, who passed over a pot of weak beer
and a modicum of change.
  He would wait until the end of the night, for the encores. Then he'd wreak
such ugliness that the BF equipment would surely be suppressed - if not
for good, certainly for the span of the resulting outrage.
  The Signals Unit could not maintain its Australian monopoly on the necessary
expertise while gross miracles were publicly flaunted by these so-called
miracle groups. So far no one in Australia outside the Signals Unit had
succeeded in replicating the miracle effects under artificial conditions,
without the participation mystique of the sharks and roe and their beloved
bands. Were research at the Universities and hospitals further advanced,
he'd be hamstrung, for tonight's work would then have the effect of spurring
rather than halting their studies.
  Sipping his beer, he gloated. The flick-dancer would make a perfect victim.
  The song changed tempo. Baker could see why the band called it a healing
song. It became almost parodically tranquil, redolent of fresh fields and
bird calls and all things sentimental. Baker resisted its cliched charm.


</sample>
