By Royce Hall CHAPTER 4 And Then There Were Three  

   Once through the gates, the two officers in their crusts wasted no time
in reaching their objective.  As prearranged, Larry made for Donna and Mark
for Katrina.  It took only a matter of seconds for the crusts to reach the
endangered pair and a few more to kick the blazing sticks away from the
base of the poles.  Mark took up a position squarely in front of them to
provide protection from attack, while Larry circled behind to slash their
bonds with a cutting attachment.
   The element of surprise was evidently starting to wear off, for the
inhabitants started to regroup and move forward throwing spears and clubs.
This constituted no danger whatsoever to the two men in their crusts, but
the two girls remained highly vulnerable.  The young Captain had given the
approaching mob the last two of his stun grenades when the XO called, "Right
Skip.  They're free.  I've got Donna.  Drop back."
   Mark Halliday edged back to put the crust in the kneel position.  He
felt the slight bump as Katrina jumped on to the back to take up position
in the piggy-back harness.  A thump on the back with her fist told him she
was in place, enabling him to rise again to the erect stance.  While he
was busy taking Katrina on board, Larry, firing needles furiously, had taken
the forward position with Donna on his back, so as to give his Captain some
leeway for the pickup.
   Donna leaned forward in her harness to pluck the laser from its clip
on the front of Larry's crust.  She set it to wide beam to torch the hut
in which she and Katrina had been held captive.  The timber dwelling with
its thatched roof, readily burst into flames to add to the general confusion.
   "Let's get out of here," ordered the Captain.
   The two crusts were brought together to form a vee, so as to protect
the two passengers as much as possible as they backed towards the gate with
firing pistols.  The mob surged forward amid howls of rage, throwing spears,
knives, swords, clubs, or anything they could lay their hands on.  The crusts,
not being designed for such an unorthodox movement, could only be moved
relatively slowly, so there was a grave danger they could be encircled.
Redbeard, intent on revenge, had somehow managed to get around behind them
unseen by the two men busily engaged in repelling the horde.  With a sneer
at Donna, he drew his arm back to throw his spear into her body, when she
took deliberate aim with the laser and shot him squarely between the legs.
   An agonised look came over Redbeard's face.  He dropped the spear, fell
to his knees and put both hands over his crotch.  He looked up at the girl
with the utmost malevolence.  She gave a cheeky wave and said, "I wish you
luck in bed tonight, lover."
   They were still only halfway to the gate, under heavy attack with missiles
bouncing off the mercronite body shells, when a succession of explosions
occurred behind the horde.  The mob must have thought they were under attack
from behind, because they stopped and turned to look.  Mark took advantage
of the situation by yelling, "Let's go! Fast!"  He set the example by racing
for the open gateway at great speed, with his companion right behind him.
   They had been travelling non-stop for about three quarters of an hour
at a steady clip, back-tracking the original route in the beam of the
headlights, when Katrina pushed the communication button on the back of
her bipedal mount.  "Mark.  Is it possible to stop for a moment?  I need
to visit the heads.  I'm absolutely bursting."
   After a brief stop to attend to their needs, also to call up De Silva
to tell him they were on the way back, the emotionally-drained foursome
continued on at a leisurely pace.  There was no indication of pursuit, nor
was it likely there would be be any until daylight.  Another hour saw them
safely back at the ship, telling Juan about their adventure.  He had recovered
from the blow.  The wound, being on the back of his head, had been attended
to by Annie.
   Later, after they had eaten, a puzzled Captain said, "What I would like
to know is what caused those explosions in the compound?  They couldn't
have happened at a better time."
   "That was me, Mark," smiled a weary Donna.  "I lasered the hut where
they put our weapons, to destroy them.  The stun grenades must have exploded
in the fire."
   "Good work," he acknowledged.  "You sure can use your head in a crisis."
   Katrina cut in.  "It wasn't only her head she used.  My advice is for
you men to wear protectors from now on.  You should have seen where she
kicked two of the barbarians with her feet."
   They all laughed.
   "It will be a rest day tomorrow for everyone.  I'm proud of the whole
lot of you.  I suggest we all have a good shower and hit the bunk.  Scamp
can keep his electronic eyes open for us.  Well, I'm off.  See you all
tomorrow."  Amid a chorus of "goodnight," Mark took his leave.

   The following morning at first light, the Captain had the droids erect
a 3-metre high electrified fence around the ship at a radius of twenty metres.
This enabled the crew to sit outside in the sun, play ball games or just
walk about in safety, as desired.  At the end of the day the fence was wound
back into its cannister and taken back inboard.
   That night, he informed them of the intention to lift-off the following
morning to spend two days on aerial survey of the planet before proceeding
to Alpha 2.
   He explained. "Unfortunately, we can't go home yet claiming success.
Le Garde is a habitable  planet for sure, but is already inhabited by war-like
humans who have a prior claim.  It could obviously only be taken over by
Earth with war and subjugation, which is to be avoided unless necessity
demands otherwise.  For that reason we must move on in the hope of finding
a habitable planet which is not inhabited by intelligent beings.
   "Even if we have no further success in our quest, we will not have failed
in our efforts.  We have established two most important facts - there are
other habitable planets, also there are other intelligent beings in existence.
Everyone report for duty at 0400 ships time and we will lift off at 0500,
which will be about mid-morning planet time."

  Ping.  "Commander Halliday?"
  Mark Halliday awoke immediately to Scamp's call.
  "Halliday.  I'm awake.  What's up?"
  "The detectors show a lot of movement around the perimeter of the clearing,
sir."
  "Classify."
  "Infred (infra red) shows approximately 1,200 humanoids.  They appear
to be assembling primitive devices, sir."
  "They must have brought in reinforcements from other settlements.  At
their level of technology they can't harm the ship.  Keep them under
observation and wake me if you consider they constitute any danger."
  "Acknowledged, sir."
  Mark rolled over in an attempt to go back to sleep, secure in the knowledge
that the ship's hull was impregnable and fireproof.

  All hands went about their duties the following morning in readiness for
lift-off, while the indigenous inhabitants of Le Garde went about their
duties of preparing to attack the ship.  It looked like being a toss-up
to see which action would occur first.  Finally the natives, perhaps because
of greater incentive, or because of the bullying of a red-bearded oaf being
carried on a stretcher, made the first move.  Large stones were propelled
at the ship out of catapults of some description, followed by an onslaught
against the vessel's legs and hull with axes and clubs.  When all of this
proved to be of no avail, the screaming horde dragged brush from the
surrounding forest, to pile it under the vessel.
  The crew were all in position in their couches in the control room, watching
the turn of events on the screens. The digital indicator showed 25 seconds to
go when smoke and flames started to obscure the view on the screens.  Moments 
later Starship One lifted slowly on antigrav amid the triumphant yells from 
the mob, who were convinced they had routed a deadly enemy.
  "It was nice of them to give us a warm send-off," said Mark Halliday
facetiously.

  The aerial survey of Le Garde completed, Starship One headed in the direction
of Alpha 2.  It was a big disappointment to find in the approach, that although
there were four captive planets, spectroscopic/multi-wave analyses proved
they were uninhabitable.  The Captain decided not to waste any further time,
so set course for Proxima Centauri.
  He was in his quarters when a voice emanated from the door speaker.  "Skip.
It's Larry and Donna.  Can we see you for a minute."
  He called, "Open", and the door responded.
  A moment later the two were seated, apprehension showing on their faces.
  Larry Mathieson started speaking.  "I know we all gave a written agreement,
apart from Juan, to rotational cohabitation, but something has happened
we didn't count on.  Donna and I have fallen for one another and want to
get married."
  Although Mark had suspected something was afoot for some time he still
received quite a shock.
  Larry continued rather nervously.  "We would like to make an official
request for you to marry us and release us from the terms of the cohab
agreement.  We have spoken to Katrina who has no objection, so it's all
up to you, Skipper."
  "I must admit you've floored me with this marriage business," Mark began.
"You both know, of course, that all married couples were excluded from this
expedition because any emotional involvement could affect the safety of
the ship and its crew as a whole, in emergency situations.  Why get married
anyway?"
  "Yes.  We're well aware of that.  We want to get married as a binding
commitment to one another.  Also we don't know what our chances are of
completing this mission alive, so want to take what happiness we can, while
we can.  You can understand that can't you Skip?  Besides, getting married
won't increase an emotional involvement now that we love each other; it
might even reduce it."
  Their Commanding Officer sat quietly thinking for a moment, then punched
a button.  "Katrina.  It's Halliday.  Would you come to my quarters, please?"
  There was silence while they waited for Katrina to arrive.  Donna hadn't
spoken one word up to this time, which was quite unusual in itself.  Katrina
entered by using her own voice command.  She sat down on the bunk and crossed
her legs.
  Mark addressed her.  "I understand you are fully aware of what these two
have in mind.  Would you mind telling me what your thoughts are?  We can
discuss it in private if you prefer."
  "I'm all for it," enthused Katrina.  "I have no objections whatsoever.
As far as I am concerned, I'm prepared to forego my cohab time with Larry
and spend the extra time with you, if you want me to."
  "Is that offer out of consideration for your two friends?  What are your
preferences?"  He reflectively stroked his bristled chin several times.
  "Quite the contrary, I would very much like to spend the extra time with
you, if you'll let me."  She gave a sweet lingering smile to Mark in such
a way that should have told him something, but he failed to interpret it
correctly.
  "It seems pretty obvious you three have got together to gang up on me,"
he lightly remarked.  Facing the couple, he said, "I hope I won't live to
regret this decision.  In the interests of harmony, I'm prepared to agree
to your joint request to a limited extent.  I'll marry you and let you off
the cohab merry-go-round, but you can only share quarters on your rostered
days off. I don't want efficiency impaired by one disturbing the sleep of the other, when going on or coming off duty.  

