The striped hole caper By Damien Broderick  

AT one moment a mind-crackingly ugly woman named Hsia Shan-yun was set to
blow the crap out of the major personal records filing installation in the
West Pacific Zone.                                                      
  Exactly one moment after that, a monitor Bug put the arm on her.
  Hsia Shan-yun was a horrifyingly tall Valkyrie, just under two metres
from her size-10 track shoes to the top of her wildly flowing black mane.
  Eyes of slashing jade green glared out at the world she despised under
slanting, epicanthic folds.
  Her mouth was ripe and full, hardly the neat, demure pallid line esteemed
by leading fashion experts of the late 22nd century.
  I won't even talk about the violent animal swing of her muscular body,
or the way her legs stretched most of the way from earth to sky and her
arms seemed fitted by evolution to a role quite other than punching data
into a terminal 15 hours a day.  A detailed list would be disgracefully
sexist, whether by our standards or hers.
  Take it from me.  Hsia Shan-yun was a pig.
  Her benighted parents, the world's last Confucian Christian Scientologists,
had hidden her in a small shielded bottle during the Reconstruction Phase
when genetic engineers in geosynchronous orbit had broadcast whole-body
altering messages to the gonads of the entire planet.  In consequence, the
unfortunate creature looked like an abominable throwback to that peak epoch
of nutrition-driven Brute Expressionism - the 20th century.
  Naturally, Shan-yun compensated for her atrocious looks by denial and
fantasy.  Day and night she read forbidden books (all books, of course,
being forbidden, but some being incredibly more forbidden than others, and
it was these sort that she sought out and crammed into her perverted brain).
  The books she sought high and low were about the 20th century, that sink
of degradation and physical excess.
  Best of all, she loved books about inner-city fun-running.
  In the depths of the empty municipal sewers, during darkest night, aided
only by the light from her Watchplate tuned to an empty channel, she pounded
out the klicks in her handmade track shoes, until inhumanly shaped muscles
swelled in her legs.
  Next of all she loved books about working with weights.
  Staring with a swollen heart at flat photographs of Bev Francis and Arnold
Schwarzenegger, she hack-squatted and bench-pressed, chest-flyed and
lat-extended, leg-lifted and bicep-curled.  What this did to her already
distorted atavistic frame can only be left to the imagination, because I
really couldn't stand the aggravation.
  How did the robot Bugs know what Shan-yun had been up to?  She'd taken
every precaution.  The whole thing had been planned out in exquisite detail
for nearly 15 months.  She'd gone over every single detail of the operation
a dozen times, from the initial routine of getting a job in Pacific Data
Central to the final step of smuggling her home-assembled Striped Hole into
the terminal terminal.
 She hadn't been able to find a flaw in the plan but obviously there'd
been a flaw you could drive a Bug through.
  The robot cop rolled up beside Shan-yun just as she was entering the Personal
Information Bubble Banks, as she had every right to do, being assistant
trainee data slibber.
  She watched it coming at her from the corner of her slitted, tilted,
jade-glowing eyes and kept walking.
  Even though she was by now very, very good at running, running would not
have helped, as it turned out.
  A cloud of gossamer filaments belched from the Bug's chest spigots and
settled on her like acid rain.
  "Shit!" cried Hsia Shan-yun, proving yet again that she was an evil low-life
throwback.


TINY itching threads coated her from head to foot, leaving uncovered only
her eyes, ears and nostrils.  It had consumed a decade of non-stop dedicated
research in the National Goo Laboratories to achieve that effect, but Hsia
Shan-yun was not impressed.  She hissed with rage.  She spat.  There wasn't
much else she could do, because the filaments put their tiny hands together
and squeezed, tightening into a body-hugging plastic shell.  Just enough
slack was left around Shan-yun's hideously over-developed ribcage and chest
for her to breathe, but only just enough.
  She started to fall flat on her face.
  Before the statue-like form could topple to the tiles and shatter, the
monitor Bug whipped out metal tentacles and nestled her carefully against
its own hard torso.
  "Citizen Hsia," the thing intoned, "it is my unhappy duty to take you
into protective custody, both for your own highest good and that of the
republic."
   "Mmmnbbn," Shan-yun explained.  "Gmmngb." 
   "I regret the temporary restraint on your freedom of speech," the tin
cop said unctuously, "but rest assured you will be permitted full range
of expression as soon as we arrive at Medical Six.  And how!"  It gave a
low chuckle, and spun about, accelerating out of the Bubble Bank.
   "We intend to indict you for conspiracy against the State," it added
for good measure.  "Appropriate rehabilitative steps will follow forthwith.
Oh my, yes."
   Did this unwelcome mechanical badinage affect the apprehended criminal?
   What do you think?
   Shan-yun was rather annoyed.
   No, that's not quite accurate.  She was seriously alarmed at her prospects.
   Actually, she was in a turmoil of panic.
   Not to put too fine a point on it, she felt an urgent need to go on the
potty.
   The monitor Bug rolled swiftly through the foyer of Data Central with
her rigid torso tucked against it like a huge ungainly swaddled baby, except
that they didn't deal that way with babies any more.
   When her head happened to tilt that way, Shan-yun had no difficulty in
seeing people scurrying out the way.  The chief slibber, coming in from
a lunch of chives, peat-growth and yoghurt sausages, blenched and turned
aside without a word.
   "Fairweather friend," Shan tried to shout bitterly, but it came out as
another collection of vowel-less unpalatalised consonants.
   Outside the building, machine and captive swung down a ramp to a
thorough-fare marked MEDICAL ONLY.
   In 217 years time, that's a sign to make your blood run cold.  Well,
I suppose it is already, to be brutally frank.
   The monitor jacked without hesitation into a high-speed conveyor unit,
thoughtfully raising a shield to keep the wind out of Shan's eyes.
   The harsh violet lights of the tunnel went blurry with speed.  Shan-yun's
tummy tried to sneak out the back way, but her backbone wouldn't let it.
Half a minute later it got its revenge.
   "All still in one piece, I hope, dear?" the machine said in Shan's reeling
ear.  "Here we are.  Have a nice day, now."
   The monitor coasted into the aseptic whiteness of a medical bay.  Two
hundred and seventeen years from now you can always tell when you've reached
a medical bay.  The atmosphere reeks of such a high-toned blend of purity
and righteousness you want to throw up.
   Two crisps blue-garbed apes stepped out of a lift.  Mental health and
social adjustment radiated from their every pore.
   "Citizen Hsia!" cried the one on the right.  "Welcome to Medical Six."
His demeanour suggested a mix of professional cheeriness and personal stoic
resignation to the iniquity of social deviants with Striped Holes tucked
inside smelly parts of their bodies.
   "Kindly place the citizen on the couch and return to your post," said
the one on the left.  Still locked solid in her plastic cocoon, Shan-yun
was positioned carefully on a form-fitting cot.  The Bug rolled away whence
it had come without a word of farewell.
   The mind-crackingly ugly woman stared up at her doctors and tried to
set off the Hole.  Nothing happened.  Her fingers were unbending.  The muscles
in her belly spasmed but she lay motionless where she was.  The Hole spun
uselessly inside her, quite beyond her control.
   "Well, Ms Hsia," the first ape told her, "you've certainly got yourself
into a peck of trouble."
   "Yep.  No lie there.  Let's hope for your sake we can straighten you
out, ethics-wise, without having to reduce you to a veggie."
   Under the plastic skin, cold sweat jumped from Shan's forehead in almost
exactly the way moisture develops on the inside of a loaf of plastic-wrapped
bread.  It was a disgusting and depressing sensation.
   "Brainscrub," one of the creatures said reflectively.  "If you can't
use it, you just gotta lose it."
   "It's a tragedy, though, Frank.  She's a person of evident resource.
How many of us could plait a Striped Hole without being picked up at the
nudge-horizon stage?  That's skill, Frank, whether or not we care to admit
it.  Talent."
   "Yet we musn't forget that she's abused her abilities to the detriment
of the State."
   "I'd never let that slip my mind, Frank, but it seems our fellow citizen
must have done."  He peered down into Shan's eyes with a look of loathing
and concern.  Shan's eyes by now were brimming to overflow with tears of
fury and terror. In fact, Shan's eyes took the opportunity to try to leap 
from her head and tear the ape's sanctimonious tongue from his head, but 
being organs ill-adapted by evolution to that function they had to content 
themselves with bulging in red-shot hatred.
   "You should have recognised your own sickness," Frank told her.  "You
ought to have boldly stepped forward for voluntary treatment."
   The threads of the cocoon tightened.
   The ape shook his head sadly.
   "Relax, Ms Hsia.  Anger is a wasteful and antisocial emotion.  There's
a good case to be made for the view that all emotion is wasteful and
antisocial, but I don't subscribe to that view.  Live and let live, I say."
   A colourful board of indicators flushed and chimed.  Shan-yun seethed.
   "We'll be sending you through to the Analyst any moment now, Ms Hsia,
and I've got to tell you, it won't look good on your record if you're
harbouring resentment."
   A muffled series of explosive noises came from the cocoon.
   A melodious tone sounded from the lift.
   "Ah, there we are now.  There's no need for anxiety, Ms Hsia.  Truly.
You'll go straight through for analysis and judgments as soon as the techs
have removed the cocoon and the Striped Hole you inserted into yourself."
   The other ape nodded vigorously, leaning across Shan-yun with an aerosol
can.  "Absolutely correct.  Remember - our job is to get you well."  He
squirted spray into her nostrils.  The room tilted and banged the side of
her head.
   She was not quite unconscious as the apes began to push the couch and
her numb body into the lift.  "Candidly, Ted," she heard Frank say, as the
darkness ripped her mind into silly small shreds, "these deviants give me
the gol-durned creeps."
 

THE cell Hsia Shan-yun woke up in was dank, foul, almost lightless, and, she
decided with horror, very possibly rat-infested.  This was impossible, of
course.  The future's not like that.  You know that and I know that.  The
people who live in the future know it better than either of us.
   Good grief, if a single fact has been established once and for all, surely
it's that the future is clean.
   It's sanitised.
   Everyone's shoes are tucked neatly under the bed before they go to sleep,
which they do at 10.15 or earlier.
   The future is not a banana republic.  Oh, sure, there's that little spot
of bother immediately up ahead, with the ayotollahs and the mullahs and
so on, but nothing's perfect, not even utopia.
   There simply can't be rat-infested cells with rusty chains and dried
marks down the stone walls looking suspiciously like old (but not all that
old) blood.  The unions, the government and the public service would not
put up with it.  The future is the last redoubt of niceness.
   Hsia Shan-yun knew that as well as we do, which is why she sat there
quivering with her hands jammed into her mouth and her lovely white even
teeth clamped into the skin of her knuckles.
   She stopped after a rather commendably brief interval, and sat up straight
on the wooden bench and stifled a cry.
            
