By John Gillard CHAPTER 8  

Whether it had been in the pursuit of a couple of dodgy jingles to make
a quid on or just a few days' hols away from it all, it seemed to Ade that
he'd had the dubious pleasure of staggering through the dripping, clammy
heat of Singapore at least a couple of times a year now, for longer than
he cared to remember. Certainly for long enough to be aware of the incredible
change that has come over the joint in recent times.
  Today's Singapore was so clean, neat and tidy that you began to forget
you were in the mysterious East at all. It had become more like bloody Germany
with the central heating turned up full. `Where were the bugs, filth and
pongs of yesteryear?', he wondered longingly as he stood surveying yet
another hygienic, sanitised marble lobby. It was sad but true. The people
here had developed such fervour about all things new and shiny that they
couldn't wait to pull down the old parts of the town and they, of course,
were the parts that had given old Singapore its wonderful, seedy charm.
  These days just about everything worth knowing about or doing in Singapore,
that two-day town to end all two-day towns, seemed to happen in the big
hotels and glittering shopping complexes. The street markets and restaurants
were still there, of course, but they were becoming fewer and fewer and
as everybody's standard of living went up like a rocket and people started
buying Christian Dior clothes, driving Porsches, watching `Dynasty' and
dancing to Michael Jackson records, all they wanted to do was to forget
all about that smelly native shit and get on with the last bit of the twentieth
century.
  `You couldn't really blame them for wanting to move on to something that
they thought was better, though, could you?', he mused. Come to that, could
he, in his wildest dreams, see himself wandering Leyton High Road doing
`street cries of olde London' like his fore-fathers? "Eels, live eels ...
apples a pound pears". Piss off! Times change, Ade. And somehow he couldn't
imagine all these Singaporeans eventually realising the folly of their
ways and going back to the bucolic bliss of rolling up camel dung and sticking
it in their ears or whatever it was that THEIR forefathers used to do,
either. They were too far down the track to Civilisation to want to know
about all that bollocks!
  When he'd first gone to Singapore in the late 1960s, he'd loved to stay
at Raffles and ponce around in the white suit and straw hat pretending to
be a card-carrying member of the Raj. He seemed to recall imagining himself
as a kind of rock 'n roll Somerset Maugham. The unpalatable truth was, that
in recent years that hotel had become so tacky that he'd finally given up
and surrendered his knackered person, complete with credit cards, to the
air-conditioned bliss of the tall, stately, steel and glass monoliths that
have sprung up in nicely art-directed jungle groves all around the town.
  After Ade's little brush with the nodding Nips, he'd decided to spend
the last couple of days of their stay there, taking it easy and regrouping
before the long haul to Europe. The advantage of said air-conditioned
monoliths, of course, was that they had every facility on hand and you didn't
have to lift a finger.
  To Maggie, of course, the stay was absolute bliss. She leaped at the
opportunity, as she always did in such places, to go and have the total
beauty treatment - face massage, manicure, pedicure, everything-bloody-cure!
In the end it took the little brown ladies almost those same two days to
complete her body overhaul.
  "It's like going to bed with the bloody Torrey Canyon", he complained
on their final evenings as she stood at the dressing table checking herself
out in the mirror.
  Starkers and completely smothered from head to toe in greasy goo of every
known variety, she'd just emerged from the beauty pits at the end of the
female equivalent of a 50,000-mile service.
  "You are a totally unromantic person", she replied, squinting into the
mirror. She often said that. With the light gleaming on her naked, oily
body she looked like something out of a dike fantasy Sparticus. In the glass
she saw him looking at her and smiling.
  "We've put on a bit of weight, 'aven't we?", he suggested daringly. The
truth of the matter was that it was rather more the outrageously expensive
bottle of wine that he'd just drunk talking than the usually tightly
lip-buttoned Ade. He'd become bored and thirsty whilst waiting for her
to get back from open-heart fingernail surgery and had succumbed to his
old addiction yet again.
  "Not at all", she pronounced. "You obviously do not understand that I
have a pre-Raphaelite body. I am simply a beautiful woman born out of my
time."
  "If I was to leap out of bed like some halfwit matineee idol in one of
those Stephanie Summers books you deny you read", suggested Ade, "and take
you firmly and expertly in my strong, weatherbeaten arms and gently draw
you close to my rock-hard, manly chest, do you know what would happen?".
  She ignored him.
  "Well, I'll tell you", he said, propping his head up on one arm and grinning.
"You've got so much of that gunge on you you'd go ... zzZZOOOP! Just like
a bar of soap right through my long, sensitive-but-masculine fingers and
end up on top of the wardrobe like bloody Tinkerbell."
  "You understand nothing about women", she said dismissively. She often
said that too, and continued plucking her eyebrows.
  "You can say what you like", he continued, warming to one of his favourite
themes, "but deep down, old Ade is a romantic". She stopped and turned
sharply, glaring at him with a cutting look of pity. He waved his hands
in front of him, shook his head as if to silence any argument and continued,
"Yes, despite what you think, I, Ade, am, believe it or not, your true
romantic, and precisely because of that, I flatly and totally refuse to
believe that the great beauties of the world go to bed looking like that.
It's like sleeping with a fucking camshaft". She made no response of any
kind.
  Thumbing through his latest airmailed copy of the Beano, Ade surveyed
his sexual prospects for the evening, eventually coming to the same gloomy
conclusion he usually reached in those days, i.e., whichever way you looked
at it, any kicks he was going to get that night were going to have to be
self-inflicted. It was definitely all down to a Barclays! Wasn't life a
crock of shit! Ignoring her, he slowly climbed out of bed and wearily made
the by-now familiar, lonely trek to the lovely, new, shiny hotel bathroom.
  
Being absolutely miles and miles from anywhere, Singapore, like Australia,
obliges visitors to and from its shores to spend hours and hours cooped
up in that shithouse little metal and plastic tube eight miles up in the
sky that ordinary people apparently consider such a glamorous and exciting
way for people to spend all their time. The lure of the jet-set. Well, bollocks
to that. Despite all this marvellous modern technology, it still took between
twenty-five and thirty hours to get from Sydney to London and, notwithstanding
all Maggie's clever ruses and wheezes to get the pair of them treated like
fucking Rajahs, most of that time always seemed to be spent sitting next
to some oaf who either weighed eighteen stone, distributed evenly across
his seat and yours, or who talked endlessly about his or her hideous life
and breathed halitosis all over you. But the main problem with air travel
over such long distances is, of course, the all-prevailing boredom of it
all. Wasn't it the Grand old Duke of Edinburgh who, when asked, "And what
was your flight like today, Your Royal Highness?", had retorted, "Have you
ever been on a plane?", and when the brown-noser had dutifully grovelled
in the affirmative, HRH had added, "Well it was very much like that".
  Right on, Phil! When you've had a numb arse and swollen ankles on one
airline, you've had 'em on 'em all, really!
  Ade always tried to sleep as much as possible when flying but on this
occasion, his little doze was rudely shattered by the plane beginning to
groan and make strange shuddering noises. After about thirty seconds, the
noises stopped and nervous conversations began in the many and varied languages
of the passengers.
  He looked gingerly up at the by-now still, calm and non-vibrating ceiling,
and stretched. Maggie wasn't in the seat beside him. He peered around, but
he couldn't see her. She had to be in the loo. She nearly always was.
  `There's something about a DC-10, isn't there?', he observed to himself.
You can bloody well say that again! Especially when you're in seat 36C.
That's the one right at the back by the karzi. The one where you can look
over your shoulder and see `The Door'. Come on now, let's not beat about
the bush; we're talking DC-10s. Everyone knows which door. Yes, that's right,
the door that McDonnell Douglas assures us does NOT fly off in mid-air with
such monotonous regularity.
  He was beginning to wake up now. He put his seat upright and watched a
clutch of carrot-haired stewardesses sprawled across a row of empty seats
some way in front of him gossiping and filing their nails, with fags a-puffing
and drinks a-swigging. A clutch was about right, too. `Why were all their
legs bruised?', he wondered.
  On this plane the entire complement of female cabin staff somehow managed
to look like former nightclub hostesses who'd realised the folly of their
ways and had given up hustling tables and settled for the old Cartier watch,
a neckful of expensive jewellery and a couple of years shuttling to and fro
to the Bahrein Hilton on stopovers. All they had to do was hang around long
enough until some swarthy Mr Right with the stretched Mercedes and numerous
business interests finally showed up with a bunch of flowers he'd pinched
off a grave somewhere, slipped them a length of the old pork poker and
eventually proposed holy matrimony and lived happily ever after.
  It certainly looked on the cards for these girls too. They weren't your
ordinary air hosties. Not your big-boned Qantas girls, not your German
trilinguists or even your Cathay cunnilinguists. Oh, no, this flight was
the triple dare ... DC-10, Seat 36C (that means that you're the first one
to either get sucked out when the door comes off, or, by the look of the
girls, sucked off if it doesn't) and, best of all, the aircraft was resplendent
in the faded, tacky colours of ... TURKISH AIRLINES!
  Oh yes, surely we have heard mention of the legendary Turkish Airline
DC-10s? Doesn't the very folklore of our times instruct us that the hedgerows
of Europe are full of the gibbering, terrified bodies of farm workers diving
for cover as the rear doors and often the entire delightful planes themselves 
plummet down upn the cowering EEC rural sector? The other, lesser-known
titbit about said airline is the new depth of uncleanliness that they dredge
in every aspect of their service. Or, as Ade subsequently remarked, "You
don't so much `fly on' a Turkish Airlines DC-10, it's more a question of
`treading in' one".
  Maggie finally emerged from the toilet, complaining bitterly about the
buffeting she'd received and the generally filthy state of said closet itself.
"I have NEVER ever seen a toilet as atrociously sordid on any plane anywhere",
she told him "It was just like ..."
  "A Turkish karzi?", he suggested thoughtfully.

One of her old flatmates, a `girl' she hadn't seen for years, was to be
in Istanbul accompanied by her daughter and working on a film. 

