By J A Genoni  

  In the dining room that evening a rather tired looking Fred
asked Jim to come to the office after the meal, where they
could have the promised yarn.
  Greg left the house after finishing his meal, informing Judy
that everything in the jewellery department was progressing
favourably, and her pendant would soon be coming off the
production line.
  In the office Fred sat down heavily in the big chair behind
the desk and gestured for Jim to take the seat opposite.
Reaching into a side cabinet he withdrew a bottle and two
glasses. He looked at Jim enquiringly but the younger man shook
his head. Pouring a double measure into his glass he drank
slowly. He said, "That's genuine French cognac, laid down by
Sir Henry himself, so it must be mature by now. I'm getting old
and I needed that."
  Jim said nothing in reply. He waited expectantly.
  Neither of the men were smoking, so for a moment Fred sat there
silently, apparently gathering his thoughts. Jim noticed how
gnarled and workworn were the hands spread out on the desk.
Yes, Fred was an old man, and a tired old man at that.
  At last Fred broke the silence. "Well Jim, what do you think
of station life? A bit different to what you expected, I guess,
eh?"
  Still Jim said nothing. He was here to listen to a
proposal, a very important proposal which might have
a great bearing on the course of his family's future life.
  Fred went on, "First Jim, I have to tell you how glad I am to
see that Judy latched onto a steady fellow like you." He smiled
slightly at Jim's embarrassed look. "I'm being straight with
you because at my time of life there's no time to be aimlessly
beating about the bush. I've got a big property here and it's
on the threshold of bigger things to come. I've had my fun at
building something up for myself, and I also feel as if I've
done something for Australia as well. We feed a big part of the
world, my boy, and that's no small thing in itself. As they
say, I can't take it with me, more's the pity." Fred added this
with a rueful grin. "I've got some good friends on this
station, my family as I call them, who regard Glencoe as their
permanent home, their country, as the black fellows have their
way of saying. They depend on Glencoe and Glencoe depends on
them. After I go I don't want the place sold to some syndicate
whose only aim is to chase the almighty dollar. Syndicates have
no feelings for people or what may happen to their lives. This
place is not a gold mine to be exploited. Every cent has to be
wrenched out of this land by more than just hands, it needs brains, 
judgement, business sense and plain old fashioned guts. Don't shake 
your head, boy. I know about Vietnam and the medal you earned. I
was a soldier once and know they don't give them away for
nothing. I know you came home in a wheelchair and what you
did to get out of it. You don't know that Ben Jason and I
were cobbers in the first world war, do you? Ben wrote back
to me saying you were his right hand man in the business,
steady and resourceful in handling difficult customers, always
reliable."
  Jim felt himself flushing. So old Ben had given him a good
write up indeed. Ben was a fair and considerate boss noted for
his square dealing to everyone, and now it looked as if he had
taken more interest in his staff than would have been
thought.
  Fred continued, "I can see in you Jim, the potential leader,
but you have to come out of where you're hiding. I believe
you've gained confidence since coming up here. You look as if
you belong in this country. You've learned to ride and you've
picked up a lot from the boys in a damn short time. I'd be
proud to call you nephew any time." Fred grinned, and they
ceremoniously shook hands.
  Jim laughed, the tension going out of him, "Thanks uncle Fred,
we could say it's mutual."
  Fred grinned, "Let's drink to it, eh?" This time Jim accepted
the proffered glass. It was good brandy, there was no doubt
about that.
  Out of curiosity he leaned forward to examine the old bottle
closely. He could just make out the label. Courvoisier, the
cognac of Napoleon. The date was obscured but he could see
eighteen hundred and something, so it was genuine.
  Jim said, "Too valuable almost to drink. The Englishman
never had anything but the best, it appears."
  "Cost me nothing," said Fred with satisfaction. "All thrown in
free with the rest when I bought the place."
  Some of the tiredness went out of Fred's face. He went on. "I
will say without bragging that we have a very smooth operation
here on this property and it's mostly because of the people I
have working with me. You get the point, Jim? I never say
anybody is working for me. They're working for themselves and
their own future on Glencoe. We all respect each other, but we
also know who is boss. Jim boy, I want you to be boss here on
Glencoe when I'm gone. I want someone like you who can be
trusted to keep this property, this land, this people, together
and marching forward."
  Fred paused to replenish his glass f rom the cognac bottle
before carrying on. "Before you make your final decision I'd
like to tell you a bit about the place. Abe Jenkins gets out
a balance regularly and he can tell you exactly about the
financial side, but only I can tell you about the great years
and the disaster years that can happen again. Such years you
have to prepare against beforehand if you're to survive. I
really had to battle it out early on to pay off this place.
Fortunately for me black labour was plentiful and cheap to
help round up the wild cattle that had over run the property
in their thousands. I think I told you before that I helped to
start the meatworks, and that turned out to be a smart move,
even if I say it myself. After the cattle were thinned out I
was temporarily free of debt, and the sheep did well, just as
I thought. The Namultja used to go after the dingo scalps, and
the dogs never bothered us much. Reminds me, a lot of scalps
came in that didn't look much like pure dingoes, but it was
one way of keeping the camp mongrels down. Dogs that go wild
are always worse than true dingoes at killing sheep, I've
found. They know too much about men and don't scare away as
easily as the real dingoes. We were shearing a great many sheep
when the Korean War sent prices of wool sky high. Near a
million dollars for the wool cheque is not bad money, I can
tell you. That's when I started most of the solid improvements
that really made this place. New bores and mills,
subdivisional fencing, stockyards, staff houses, our first
power plant and cool room. It was marvellous to at last have
the capital to do things the right way." Fred raised the brandy
glass again.
  "As our black labour faded away we started a mechanisation
programme which we keep modernising with the times. Jock Angus
was a real find for me, and now Daisy's boys have grown up and
are sticking to the station we are getting by quite well with
using contractors in the busy times of the year. I can remember
the blacks we used to have here. Both men and women made damn
good stockriders and as far as I could see were quite happy
with the situation till the bloody do-gooders and trade unions
had their blasted standard wage idea. Up to a hundred used to
be on Glencoe, doing a bit of mustering, droving and stock
handling beside the trapping. They did it when it suited them,
then went on their walkabouts and attended to their initiation
ceremonies and such. They were handy but few would ever settle
down to steady work all the week. We supplied them with tucker,
tobacco and blankets, and all their cousins and uncles and
friends as well. It cost us plenty, but after all it was their
country we were using, so we didn't mind. But big wages for
what they did, and houses supplied for the whole mob, was out
as far as we were concerned. If somebody died in a house they
wanted a new one, and rather than go out far for firewood
they'd chop up the furniture and use that on their campfire.
A real black doesn't want a house. A windbreak and the dust to
sleep in surrounded by his dogs for warmth is their idea of
living. The chairbourne experts wanted to make him into a
whiteman and a Christian but now that's all backfired. He
wants all the whiteman has but doesn't realise that it has to
be worked for. He wants the land he never made use of, returned
so he can get mineral royalties as well as free social
services. It's well ahead of what is offered to a white
citizen, and is going to lead to plenty trouble in the future.
The only word that's important to him now is `Gimme, Gimme.'"
  Fred laughed apologetically. "Sorry Jim. I'd better shut up.
We old squatters are one-eyed on the subject. And, of course,
I must admit there's any amount of good black people as well.
Many of them have good jobs in Canagra. We've got a lot doing
well at the meatworks. At home here we've Johnny and George,
and old Annie and the younger ones, all belonging to Glencoe,
all good friends of mine."
  Fred grinned as he remembered something. "Old George must have
been quite a lad in his day because in his mispent youth he stole 
old Mary away from the Bundaru tribe when they were all having 
some big general corroboree over near Ayers Rock years
ago. They sent their kadaitcha man after him but George trailed
out into the desert and circled around on him. He caught the
Bundaru executioner asleep and settled his hash with a
tomahawk. George dug into the side of a big anthill, put his
man inside and left the ants to mend the hole. Swept out all
the tracks, and came home with a clear conscience. The other
mob must have had their suspicions but they never came after
his kidney fat again. George told me all about it knowing I
wouldn't give him away to the white police. Perhaps that's why
he sticks so close to Glencoe."
  Jim showed his amazement, "You mean little old George, the
gardener?"
  Fred chuckled, "Surprised you, eh? There's more to Glencoe than
meets the eye, I can tell you that."
  Jim thought...Maybe even more than you know yourself, uncle
Fred.
  Fred said, "That's my policy, Jim. I want to know all about
everybody who shares a future on Glencoe. If you know them you
can handle them. You know what you can get out of them. You
know how they will react to every situation."
  Jim was impressed. This good psychology which uncle Fred
expressed was based on a lifetimes experience in living with
and handling his fellow men. A man could learn a lot by
listening to him. One weakness was very apparent to Jim. It
was damned hard to know everything about everybody, especially
on Glencoe where there seemed any amount of secrets floating
around.
  Fred continued, "After most of the blacks left, the dingoes
gradually took over and now we're down to half the sheep we
once carried.

