By Kenneth Bullock Sydney  

Since the Melbourne had closed to within fifty kilometres of
Sydney and flown off all serviceable aircraft to the R.A.N. Air
Station at Nowra NSW, MacKenzie had been the victim of
divergent influences.
  `Harbour routine' was an easy boring exercise and MacKenzie had
virtually switched off from the `intruder' incident. There were
few people left aboard interested in anything other than making
the best out of shore leave and those interested in MacKenzie's
adamant stand had heard enough, even Jaws! Commander Ferris had
been the one person who MacKenzie avoided as much as possible.
Ferris had conversely sought to raise the subject, but only if
he could put MacKenzie down. On one occasion Ferris had tried
to review the incident in front of two relatively junior
Engineer officers. After a sarcastic resume, MacKenzie had
stared at his pompous superior for a few moments then had left
the wardroom without saying a word. He remembered telling
Brenda that if he had stayed he would have smashed the
bastard's face in.
  Brenda had frowned saying, `No one in the navy is worth
throwing your career away ... catch him in a dark alley
sometime.' ... and that had sounded like a damn good idea.
He found himself seriously contemplating how he would demolish
Ferris, but in more rational states of mind MacKenzie knew that
there was less than a remote chance of him reverting to such
action ... even to Ferris.
  When MacKenzie was ashore with Brenda, in their apartment, he
tried to put the ship, aircraft and the `incident' at the back
of his mind and concentrate on getting `high' on domestic
bliss. Most of the time he was okay, but Brenda sensed his
innermost turmoil and used every feminine trick she could
conjure to keep her man from living `navy'. Sometimes it was
just too hard and they talked problems out. One morning she
read an article in her part of the morning paper. Doug had been
coming ashore for the best part of a week:
  `Well that's interesting, did you know about this?' she said,
pushing the paper towards him.
  `What's it all about?'
  `Looks like we're getting some Harriers!'
  He blinked and held his big right hand out ...
  As he studied the article, Brenda looked carefully at the man
she had flown from Canada to join a lifetime ago. He's at that
magical age, she thought. Younger women seemed to melt when he
talked to them. And who the heck could blame them!
  His dark wavy hair was flanked by patches of silver. Tiny laugh
wrinkles which used to disappear when he stopped laughing were
now a permanent feature of his rugged face. He had always
tanned easily and was still as brown as most of the surfies at
Sydney's famous beaches.
  His big square jaw reminded her of the Gregory Peck she saw in
him. Whenever she told him that he reminded her of a film star
he just laughed and said she must be blinded by love. But he
never seemed to tire of her and often said that she looked like
the same little blonde tiger he had met in Canada. Well, she
was no more ageless than him ... might be five, no, closer to six
years younger, but she sure as heck had to spend a lot of time
looking after herself to keep up with him.
  At least he didn't just plunge in the ocean and swim a
blistering hundred metre dash anymore. Her thoughts drifted to
their endless separations, which seemed to be harder to adjust
to each year. But as some kind of bonus, they had no children,
no pets and no direct relations in Australia. She laughed to
herself thinking what a stupid way to put it. They didn't have
any kids or pets anywhere else either, then she sighed thinking
of her father in British Columbia. She hadn't seen him for
three years and for that matter they hadn't seen Doug's
parent's either ...
  `How the hell do these news hounds find out about hot stuff
like this when even I don't know about it,' he said, thrusting
the paper down on the table and staring at the article.
  `Probably because Ferris knew and didn't feel like letting you
know?' she suggested.
  `Yeah, well that's about what the son-of-a-bitch would do ... 
Christ, six of the latest Harriers just like that. If we get
any of our pilots back from the R.N., who took off when they
stuffed us up, we might just take a few to sea with us next
time.' MacKenzie seemed deep in thought.
  `Aw come on Doug, surely you have to train people up, not just
the pilots, what about spares, people to maintain the
aircraft?'
  MacKenzie looked at her in surprise, then laughed, `Sure taught
you well, didn't I, that's just what I was thinking about.'
  `Yeah, I'll bet you were Lieutenant Commander ... now would
you mind putting your thoughts down on paper and let me have
them by say 1200?' her eyes twinkled and she thrust her face
towards him in a saucy gesture.
  `YES MA'AM ... coming right up,' he quickly eased out of his
seat and made a grab for her. But she was too fast and raced
towards their bedroom.
  `Oh no you don't, I know what you're after,' she protested
mildly in a trapped position on their bed, `You'll be late!'
  `So what, I'm in charge ... or at least I was,' he said
suddenly, his mood changing.
  `He's coming back today?'
  `That's right Tiger and I sure hope the son-of-a-bitch got a
bit while he was away!' They both laughed, but she knew Doug
would be in for a rough time when he confronted the Commander.
  `Well, time I was off,' he told her, reluctantly.
  She was still in the bathroom putting on her face and thinking
about the day's lessons for her mob of kids. Who said she
didn't have any children ... he came into the bathroom:
  `Well at least you look like a well dressed civilian,' she
said. He wore a light brown sports coat and tan slacks, but
once aboard the carrier he would have to change into his
uniform.
  `You look pretty good yourself,' he said grinning.
  She felt an instant warm glow and turned away from the mirror
to kiss him:
  `Good luck!'
  `Yeah, I'll probably need it, call you some time later, okay?'
  `Sure.'
  `Okay, I'm off then.' Without another word MacKenzie left the
apartment and walked to the bus stop in deep thought. The trip
over the bridge to Woolloomooloo dockyard hardly registered.
  At 1025 MacKenzie left the Operations room feeling very uneasy,
but he tried to lecture himself, thinking that he'd have it out
with him if necessary and then see the Skipper.
  The Captain had given him an opening when he had asked
MacKenzie if he was going away for Easter.
  `Yes Sir,' he had said. `Hobart, if I can be spared for the
extra days.'
  `Well I don't see why not, you deserve a break the same as
everyone else. I suppose Ferris will agree ... anyway why
Hobart?' Captain Philips had asked, politely.
  `Well there's some kind of gliding regatta.' MacKenzie had
remembered shrugging, feeling embarrassed.
  The Captain had frowned, knowing there was no love lost between
the two officers, `Well, perhaps I might tell Ferris that
you'll find time to drop in and see old what's his name?'
  `Barton Sir.'
  `Right, one of our oldest aviators Mac, and they have him
stuffed away as Naval Officer Commanding Tasmania, as some kind
of prize ... some times I don't think Personnel quite
appreciate you flyboys.'
  God, what a difference between the two men, thought MacKenzie
reaching Ferris' cabin.
  It was exactly 1030 and if Ferris kept to his harbour routine
of retreating to his cabin to read the morning paper over a
coffee, then he'd get him.
  `YES ... who is it?'
  `Operations Officer.'
  `Come in,' Ferris said condescendingly.
  They eyed each other for a few moments before Ferris spoke in
the same tone as he used on junior officers:
  `Well, what do you want?'
  `Do you mind if I sit down?' MacKenzie replied, ignoring 
Ferris's question.
  `Suit yourself.'
  MacKenzie pulled the remaining chair close to the Commander's
desk and casually sat a little more than a metre from him,
appraising the musty smelling untidy cabin:
  `Well?'
  Feigning interest MacKenzie said:
  `Did you have a good week's break Sir?'
  `It wasn't a full week, it was only five bloody days. Anyway,
get to the point MacKenzie, you didn't come to ask about my
personal affairs.'
  MacKenzie toyed with the idea of challenging Ferris about the
Harriers, but decided that all Ferris had to do was to say the
information had come whilst he was away ... `Well Sir, it's
only a small matter. I shouldn't really be bothering you with
it but Captain Philips,' he rolled his words out slowly,
hopefully creating an atmosphere of potential conflict, `he
reminded me to check with you before going on Easter leave.'
  `It's not bloody Easter yet MacKenzie!' Ferris retorted, a
fleck of spit leaving his mouth narrowly missed MacKenzie's
knee.
  `Full marks Sir,' MacKenzie answered in an icy tone, `but I
don't plan on a Sydney dockyard sightseeing tour during Easter
plus three days annual leave, I need to confirm travel
arrangements.'
  `I'm not interested in what you do on confirmed public holidays
MacKenzie.'
  `I might remind you Sir that I haven't had any god damned
annual leave in eight months, which includes standing by last
Christmas ...'
  `All right MacKenzie, you don't have to give me a sobbing heart
story,' Ferris interrupted.
  They glared at each other for several seconds, but MacKenzie
was now determined to get the answer he wanted so he didn't
avert his unflinching stare:
  `Is Sub-Lieutenant Jackson putting in for any leave?' Ferris
demanded in a gruff tone.
  MacKenzie was elated, the bastard had backed down. Right, he
would play along with him:
  `No Sir, he's had his leave at Christmas and I've laid the law
down, if I'm away, he must be on duty every day. I'll give him
my phone number and if an emergency occurs, I'll immediately
cancel and return to the ship.' He was sure that Ferris knew
his tubby assistant had been on leave at Christmas because
their had been an argument about that as well.
  Ferris slowly and deliberately folded his newspaper and tossed
it on his bunk:
  `Where, may I ask, do you intend going and for how long?' he
sarcastically demanded.
  `Tasmania, Hobart, nine days, including Easter and the
following weekend, starts on the Thursday before Good Friday.'
  Ferris reached in his desk for a small calendar and studied it
without replying. Then he looked at MacKenzie:
  `So that puts you back on the 14th ... having fiddled the
weekend?'
  MacKenzie seethed but said nothing.
  `All right MacKenzie, just make sure you're "on-deck" by the
14th and that Jackson has the complete picture,' he looked away
from MacKenzie, as if dismissing him and reached for his
newspaper.
  MacKenzie didn't move. There was another matter that had been
waiting for this kind of an opportunity. He was due himself to
be promoted to Commander soon and he didn't want to precipitate
an incident that would jeopardise his career, but he had to get
something straight with Ferris:
  `Sir, I'd like to know what pisses you off so much about me?'
  Ferris looked at him, his mouth open in surprise. He was so
used to being a bully and not having his authority challenged,
that when it was he didn't know what to say.
  MacKenzie realised this and went on: `Sir, I'm not just a
junior officer. I know my responsibilities and I cooperate one
hellava lot better if I'm treated like the senior Lieutenant
Commander I'm supposed to be?'
  Ferris's face turned a deep red as his blood pressure rose. 

