<sample>
	<id> P01 </id>
	


	<note> 2008 words </note>
	


	<source> Marzipan plan </source>
	


	<bl> By David Astle </bl>
	


	<h> Level Pegs </h>
	

  TARQUIN was the youngest and most solidly built of the boys, and inarguably
spoke the worst English. His everyday vocab could be counted on all the
Monstrelli toes, Mum included. Shot was his syntax.
  &quot;You doing you is what?&quot; could be translated into &quot;What are you doing?&quot;
  &quot;Pardon?&quot; Art replied.
  &quot;You heard mac.&quot;
  Tarquin was the fellow in the fawn coat that had been regulating the queue
which wanted to see the tuxedo lady. Art noticed that he'd popped outside
the tent but thought nothing of it. In fact, Tarquin had spotted the wet
gleam of Art's eye through the tent flap and went round to bust him.
  Art's impulse was to bolt. To lose himself in the black corners of Enklefair
but he wisely saw the man in fawn coat as the more capable athlete.
  He doffed his hat. It made him nuder.
  &quot;You see, you pay, mac, eh?&quot;
  &quot;Yes,&quot; agreed Art. Surprisingly he wasn't that worried. Maybe because
of the beer, or the carnival buzz that was surrounding him once again. Maybe it
was because what more had Art to lose?
  He recognised Tarquin as one of the gypsies. Even in the slim purply light
of the evening, Art could see Tarquin's brow and height of cheek as belonging
to the face of one who'd moved his maze, over a year ago now. He was warm
and getting warmer.
  Tarquin didn't recognise Art. The event of pulling down mirrors, for Tarquin,
was not an event. Besides which Tarquin had changed little since that time,
while Art, a year ago, had worn less wrinkles and certainly more clothes.
  Art replaced his hat and backed away.
  &quot;You see, you pay, eh?&quot;
  &quot;Pay? I've no money. Someone stole my money. And my clothes.&quot;
  &quot;Well shit up and bloody then!&quot;
  &quot;Yes. I'm clearing off. I'm getting out of your hair. Yes. Everything's
normal.&quot;
  Art was saying these words as he paced backwards. Feet on lukewarm earth.
Tarquin didn't move. He watched the old man retreat. Meanwhile, on the
other side of the tent's wall, the lady in tuxedo made the sound of an
aluminium tape-measure, much to the delight of the ten or so people before
her stage.
  It was a cocktail of beer and buzz that heartened Art. He boldly walked
about Enklefair in underpants and hat and absorbed the magic of it all.
Tarquin's familiar face was proof enough for Art that he had found the new
home of his mirrors. This was where the gypsies lived. This, therefore,
was where his maze must live. Mind you, Art could not help feeling crestfallen
with Enklefair. It was in no way comparable to the grandeur and invention of
Tupwick Realm. There were no, what he called, Big Rides. It was really a
very tame affair that all the same had attracted a sizeable crowd.
  As Art walked, the music of one popular song thinned and was then smothered
by another. The image that occurred to Art was that of fried eggs in a pan,
the white of the egg being one song overlapping*ovelapping with the music
of another white, the different yolks representing a ... forget it. For
Art to wrestle with such crap was indicative of such music and its universal
effect.
  It was very small, this Enklefair, only a few acres. Tupwick Realm was
fifty acres. Art remembered that from the brochure. Fifty fun-filled acres,
it read. And the lighting of Tupwick Realm was much more sophisticated.
Enklefair didn't seem to have any electricity, apart from the amount its
puny rides were forced to generate. The hum of these generators melded with
the music and was at times adorned with the meaningless scream of a girl
in love.
  He ambled. The place was mainly stalls and galleries. Each one dimly lit
with gas or by kerosene cressets planted thereabouts. Or by old man moon
himself who had decided to be a capital D on that particular night. But
there wasn't much soliciting going on. None of that twirling cane routine,
the softshoe and the barking or the singling out of bodies from a passing
crowd. For there was a crowd. It walked through the night air, through the
sibilance of gas, the toilings of a generator, a scream, a wheedle, this
numbness of music, this silence.
  The cressets gave off a sharp oily smell, the generators a dowdy fume.
Between both was the smell of cigarettes. The floor of the fair was dotted
with butts. Mostly youths were smoking. This was a familiar sight to Art.
The coalition of night and carnival leased a brief independence for the
teenager, smoker and lover. A chance to fill their mouths with smoke or
another's tongue. Smokers stopped the momentum of mooching peers to steeple
the hands and light up. Lovers were more sly. You could see their interlocked
hands, sometimes the sloppiness of an arm across the top of shoulderline,
but when the business of kissing came, they made for the spots where even
the old man moon couldn't pry. Back at Tupwick Realm the favourite spot
was behind the roller-coaster. There was a bank of grass where the lovers
lay, breathing each other, focusing on themselves, or sometimes on a
roller-coaster car that cranked its way up to the circuit's peak,
excruciatingly teetered around the half-circle so as to confront the dip's
crest and then, and then, then, scream down rocket up. And of course, for the 
lovers, it was all performed for their eyes, an image with which to redefine 
their lot.
  But at this Enklefair there was nothing like a roller-coaster. A glut
of lovers but no roller-coaster. There was a ferris wheel for infants, a
manually operated carousel and maybe some other things that Art was yet
to find. Either way, the available images were earthier.  
  The gypsies that ran this Enklefair were not stupid. They had seen these
lovers and so filled the fair with silly machines that went to confirm the
boy's strength or the girl's kissability. For a varying number of coins, the 
boy was allowed to punch a bag, swing a mallet or Indian armwrestle against
the plaster biceps of a machine called Mister. While the girl could put
in the boy's money and get a card saying Yeech or Okay or Wildfire. 
  Art was looking for his mirror maze. His search was not a frantic one.
He walked in the warm stupor of the carnival, as though aimlessly. The carnival
was as much part of him as were his mirrors. It was fantastic to be amid
things again. This ambience of fair was what his lungs had breathed as a
less old man, as a man in possession of a maze. The maze was his personal
history, he would re-acquaint himself with this duly. Now was the reunion
with his era.
  There was a cluster of people gathered about the next stall, which was
called Superclutch. It was out in the open, but lengths of ribbon were strung
between stakes to mark its boundaries. The man in underpants and hat
approached the other people and room, understandably, was made for him.
All the stall consisted of was a long, loose cord covered with pegs. The
simple type of peg without the spring action but two wooden prongs and a
flat little top like a beret. A gypsy-looking girl was running the show.
She had bangles on each wrist and a brilliant smile.
  &quot;And you sir, would you care to take the challenge?&quot;
  It was the gypsy girl that had spoken, but not to Art. Art's arrival had
been recorded by the girl and possibly he would be the next dared, but for
now the girl was addressing a man in a Hawaiian shirt, that even the night
couldn't douse.
  &quot;No, no,&quot; he replied.
  &quot;It costs only one blue token, sir,&quot; persisted the girl, &quot;and tonight's
record-to-beat is only nineteen.&quot;
 &quot;Come on, Les,&quot; said a woman beside him. Her profile seemed to complement
the profile of Les, suggesting she was a wife; when they kissed it would
be as snug as the meshing of jigsaw bits.
  &quot;No, no,&quot; said Les.
  &quot;Only one blue token,&quot; said the girl, &quot;and only nineteen to beat.&quot;
  &quot;One lousy token,&quot; said the wife, &quot;I'll give her my token if that's what
you're worried about.&quot;
  &quot;Come on, Les.&quot; This was Art. He was getting into the groove.
  &quot;Look,&quot; said the girl, &quot;all you have to do is pull off a peg, like so.&quot;
She did this and held the peg in her hand. &quot;Then, only using the same hand,
pull off another one. Like so. See? Easy. You look the type that could hold
more than nineteen pegs in one hand!&quot; She replaced the two pegs. The cord
wobbled.
  &quot;Come on, Les.&quot;
  &quot;It's a woman's job.&quot;
  &quot;Look, here's the token. Show us how it's done.&quot;
  Les took the token from his wife and sauntered up to the girl. There was
waggish applause from the onlookers. Les had become a character for the
evening.
  &quot;Good on you Dad,&quot; said a boy who suddenly appeared around the shins
of Les' wife.
  Les gave the girl the token. She dropped it into the pouch of her apron.
Les, with all possible sang-froid, pulled off a peg. The girl told him to
put it back and to join her on the other side of the cord. She was experienced
enough to know the hero Les had become. She held up the cord and Les stooped
under. Again there was applause, even some lewd whistling as the two stood
together, Hawaiian shirt and apron, on the other side of the line.
  &quot;Can I start?&quot; asked Les.
  &quot;You can start.&quot;
  Les pulled off a peg. It was the same one that he'd pulled off with his
back to the audience. This was his way of being defiant.
  Spontaneously, the crowd said, &quot;One.&quot;
  Les pulled off another one, pulling randomly now, and held them both in
the palm of his right hand.
  &quot;Two,&quot; said the crowd.
  A third peg was pulled off, violently. Les was brimming with confidence.
The crowd was behind him.
  &quot;Three!&quot;
  The cord still swayed from the violence of the third pull. Les showed
his versatility by steadying the cord with the ball of his fist, and then,
in almost the same movement, snaffled up another peg.
  &quot;Four!&quot;
  His right hand was doing all the work. His left was forbidden to be used.
Just to be safe, Les had tucked that hand into the back of his shorts.
  &quot;Five!&quot;
  Not much longer after this came &quot;Six!&quot;
  Then &quot;Seven!&quot;
  The fingers of the gypsy girl were lost in the apron pouch. She was slowly
turning tokens over and over. Her smile was wide and bewitching.
  &quot;Eight!&quot;
  Les was sweating. The wood of the pegs was growing moist in his palm.
He loosened his grip slightly. If he held them too tight, one might be squeezed
free and the entire exercise would be a fiasco.
  &quot;Nine!&quot;
  Yet if his hold was too loose then the topmost peg of his load might tumble
off. The crowd would swoon. He would not even be near tonight's record-to-beat.
Trix, his wife, would console him, accustomed to his shortcomings. His son,
Nick, would be embarrassed. 
  &quot;Ten!&quot;
  Halfway, thought Les. He was aiming for twenty. He wanted to just pip
the record. He would be a success. What pegs followed that would make himn
a legend. The crowd's counting had attracted more crowd. This was why the
gypsy girl was smiling. Les' pride was a sales pitch. Les cursed that
ever-hungry crowd under his breath. This was what had defeated those before
him, not just in the peg game, but on other stages, performing other feats.
Trying to quench the unquenchable.
  &quot;E - le - ven -&quot;
  This had been a shaky one. A peg central to his load had shifted, so
receiving the eleventh peg unsurely. The line was wobbling again. Les had
lost the audacity to steady it with his fist.


</sample>
