<sample>
	<id> P03 </id>
	


	<note> 2009 words </note>
	


	<source> Floating </source>
	


	<bl> By Nancy Corbett </bl>
	

When Hanako heard Jack come up to bed that night after he rang Hannah, she
lay in bed and listened to his movements in the next room. He was humming
to himself and she wondered if he was thinking about Hannah. She felt her
virginity as a great disadvantage. Though her mother had twice begun to
arrange a marriage, Hanako had refused to hear of it. Like many young Japanese
women who could neither accept the traditional ways, nor completely ignore
them, she was confused. She bitterly resented the cold and offhand manner
Japanese men adopted toward women, but she did not trust the Western men
she met, either; their politeness toward women was strange, suspect. She
thought it must be insincere. She had accepted her loneliness without question
and had been, she thought, prepared to go on accepting it. Then she had
come to live in this house, where the relations between people were generous
and easy, and where she was the only one who carried tension within herself
most of the time. It was clear that deprivation was not inevitable.
  The house was quiet now. She turned on the tiny night light next to her
bed and took an envelope from a drawer in the night table. In it there was
a picture of her father. His severe, handsome face simply looked out, with
no expression. He did not reveal the things hidden in his mind's silence. She
felt that he loved her, but of course he had never said so. Why couldn't
they talk, as Matthew and Jack and Grace did, with laughter and affection?
Why, in her home, was everything always so cold and so quiet? Though her
family was prosperous, it seemed that everything - food, talk, good will
- was measured out in tiny, grudging amounts. Always just enough to keep
from starving; never a plenty. The attitude of her family typified yoyu
ga nai - not enough to share, no margin, no space for strangers, nothing
extra. The term came from the old days, when there was no empty space between
the crowded fields for a stranger and even when it wasn't true, it was an
ingrained habit of thought in her family that there was nothing to spare,
as though only meanness and measuring of everything would permit survival.
  Hanako put away the picture of her father and clicked off the light. She
lay on her back in the bed, with her arms straight along her sides. She could feel
the lightness of her body; too thin, she thought. Still, it gave her her
career. Would a man like it? Anyway, she had seen that afternoon that her
body was not very different from Hannah's, so being small was not, in itself,
a problem. Not with Jack. Hatsutaiken; the first physical experience. She
hated that word, splashed across posters in the Ginza, Asakusa or Shinjuku,
advertising sex films. But her time must come soon. He would be experienced
and would help her. She would have gone to him then but could not, while
his parents were in the house.
  Though her mind was in a turmoil and she lay without sleeping most of
the night, she scarcely moved. In the morning her bed was less rumpled than
Jack's, who had slept soundly.
  At breakfast, Grace looked at Hanako with concern.
  `You look ill,' she said. `Is something wrong?'
  `No,' Hanako murmered. `Nothing wrong.'
  Jack felt restless and excited. He had dreamed of Hannah in the night
and now he noticed Hanako's hair and the curves of her cheek and neck more
directly, more personally than before. He remembered from some book lost
in the past that, for Japanese men, a woman's neck was the most erotic part
of the body.
  Hanako was so aware of his attention that she could not eat. He must know
that she had been in his room, ransacking his belongings like a criminal!
Yes, he was staring at her, letting her know that he knew! She could not
bear it, and fled, her face burning with shame, away from the table and
up the stairs to her room where she threw herself on the bed. She stormed
inwardly at herself for lacking kinoji, the spirit of control. Kinoji is
essential to a Japanese girl's self respect; it is the ability to be calm,
no matter how violent the feelings beneath the surface; the ability to keep
control no matter how strong the urge to act or speak. She felt violated,
but she could blame no one. It was herself she had betrayed. Her father
had been right. She had made a grave mistake in coming to this strange place,
cutting herself off from all the familiar supports of her world. She had
weakened herself. She was alone. She felt raw and vulnerable, and very ashamed
for acting badly. She did not cry. Crying was for extreme anger. For this
feeling, there was no relief.
  Grace knocked then, and came to sit beside her on the bed. Hanako's face
was hot and she could not raise her eyes.
  `What has upset you, Hanako?' Grace asked. `Please trust me, dear; tell
me what has happened.'
  But the younger woman could not answer, and Grace reached out and smoothed
the hair away from her flushed cheeks.
  `It must be very difficult to come to a place where everything is so
strange and different,' she said. `You're so young! You must miss your mother
and father, and your friends. You must miss Tokyo.'
  `No,' Hanako whispered.
  `I'm not sure of this,' Grace went on, carefully, after waiting for a
moment, `but I have the feeling that my son has done something to upset
you. You mustn't feel that you have anything to hide from me, or be afraid
that I'll be angry if ... oh, this is difficult! Let me start again. Jack's
a young man, and you are very beautiful. It wouldn't be surprising if he
were attracted to you, here in the same house. I love my son, but men are
men. If he approached you, perhaps you would feel some obligation, because
of us ... Hanako, have you any idea what I'm talking about?'
  `No,' she said. With her mind whirling as it was, and Grace's vagueness,
the words were virtually meaningless to her.
  `Let me try to be more clear. Has Jack done anything to upset you?'
  `Oh, no!'
  `So it has nothing to do with Jack?'
  `Ah.'
  That was different. It had everything to do with Jack. Hanako was used
to hiding her feelings, and besides it is considered insincere in Japan
to tell the blunt truth when it might hurt or embarrass someone else. She
found it hard to know what to do, because she knew Grace wanted to know
the truth, and Hanako would have liked to be frank with her. It would be
a relief. But the old habits were too strong. For her to say that she loved
Jack, when nothing had occurred between them besides simple friendliness,
would embarrass her, not to mention the unsuspecting Jack, and it would
certainly puzzle Grace. It might even cause trouble between Jack and his
parents, and they had been so kind to her - no, she could not. So she made
a great effort to get control of herself again.
  `I think, maybe I'm sick.'
  `You do seem warm. Do you have work today?'
  `No work.'
  `Then just stay in bed. You look exhausted, and it's bitterly cold out.
Try to go back to sleep, if you can.'
  Grace's kindness so disarmed Hanako that she was afraid she might cry,
after all, but she blinked back the tears and shook her head, to clear it.
Her glossy black hair caught the light and Grace felt a rush of maternal
feeling for her. She reached to stroke Hanako's face.
  `Just stay there,' she said gently. `I'll bring you some tea later. If
you want anything, call out.'
  Hanako pressed her hand gratefully, and curled up beneath the blankets.
She heard Grace go down the stairs. Soon the morning quiet of the house
settled around her, and she fell asleep.
  She woke to find Jack sitting on the end of her bed, looking at her
thoughtfully. A spasm of panic went through her and she sat bolt upright,
clutching the quilt. She looked around frantically, her eyes glittering
with fear.
  `Hey,' said Jack, raising his hand as if to defend himself from the violence
of her shock. `I won't hurt you. I just came in to see if you were all right
before I left the house. They've both gone out already, and we're a little 
worried about you.'
  The tone of his voice was reassuring, and Hanako began to breathe again.
  `Sorry, sorry,' she whispered.
  `No, I'm sorry. For waking you. Of course you were shocked - you were sound
asleep. I shouldn't have come in, I've disturbed you.'
  `No.'
  `But since you're awake now, can I get you anything? Some tea?'
  `Oh, no!'
  `You don't want it, or you're afraid it's too much trouble?'
  `Too much trouble.'
  `Yes, that's what I thought. Stay here, I'll be back in a minute.'
  Jack bounded down the stairs and Hanako could hear him making the tea
below in the kitchen, whistling a little, like his father did. She got out
of bed quickly and went to the mirror, where she studied her face. She brushed
her hair, outlined her eyes with kohl, rubbed gloss on her lips, then scuttled
back into bed and pulled up the quilt. Her heart was pounding. Was she clean?
She ducked her head beneath the blankets and took a deep breath. Nothing,
only a faint scent of her perfume.
  Jack came in a few minutes later with a tray.
  `Here we are,' he said cheerfully. `Tea and sympathy. And a few biscuits,
just in case.'
  He poured the tea and handed her a cup. She was grateful, as holding
it and drinking gave her something to do with her hands, and she did not
have to look at him. Tea was just as useful here as it was in Japan.
  `My mother asked me if I did something that upset you,' Jack said. `I
hope not. If I did, it wasn't intentional.'
  `But no,' Hanako said. `You did nothing.'
  `I thought you might have felt I didn't want you here. That I was angry
because you were here. How much do you understand of what I'm saying?'
  Hanako shook her head, leaving him puzzled. She didn't always understand
him, but his words were less important to her than the tone of his voice,
or the expression on his face. Just then what mattered was that they were
alone in the house, and that he was sitting on her bed.
  He could not believe it when she reached out with a suddenly sure hand
and took his cup, still nearly full, and placed it on the table beside her
bed. She did not hesitate. She got up from the bed and unbuttoned the long
silk shirt she was wearing, to let it fall around her feet. One part of her
shared Jack's amazement. But the part of her that was in control was as
calm as though she were just shedding an outer garment during a photo session,
and was still fully dressed beneath it.
  But she was naked. Her body was very pale in the pale winter light. She
held Jack's eyes with her own, calmly, and she reached up and pulled the
comb from her hair so that the smooth dark wave of it fell against her
gleaming skin. She felt powerful as she stood there so close to him, powerful
enough to reach out her hand and claim him.
  `I am for you. I'm yours,' she murmured in Japanese, but that wasn't what
she meant. Made bold because, after all, he couldn't understand the words,
she said what she wanted to say: `You are mine now.'
            

</sample>
