By John Macgregor  

Next morning, a Saturday, I shopped for a new suit in the
company of Sam, Alice, and Sarah. Children, Sam had cautioned
me, were not well tolerated in London's clothing shops. I
wasn't greatly concerned. There couldn't (I reasoned) be a city
left in the world where convention spoke louder than money. Two
years in business had taught me something.
  The pound's stage whisper, it turned out, was audible the
length of Bond Street. Alice and Sarah were quickly accepted,
even occasionally twinkled at.
  I bought my grey three-piece at Brides, from the most overtly
homosexual man I had ever encountered. Even the children picked
up on it, laughing uproariously whenever he spoke, or arranged
the limp, mutinous hair over his bald patch. They had to be
taken out while I organised myself some shoes.
  We moved on to an Oxford Street children's wear shop, where I
purchased the girls each a mauve tutu. This time I was told I
had lovely children; things were looking up.
  When we parted, after a lunch by the Serpentine, it was
arranged that Sam would pick me up at six. I spent the
afternoon in a health studio near Browns, retaliating against
the calls of the flesh, and bottle, to which I had lately
fallen prey. I let the sauna do most of the work.
  Sam buzzed me from the foyer at six-thirty. She seemed
chronically late - no doubt a legacy of single motherhood.
  I looked very nice, she said, herringbone suited me; she
squeezed my arm affectionately. I said she too looked very
nice. And that, ah, birds suited her. Under her full-length
cashmere coat she was wearing a simple black cotton dress, with
maroon seagulls all over it.
Sam's father, whom I was permitted to call Roger, was a most 
unchristian Christian, I thought.
  `How is the Philistine, daughter?' he asked at one point,
referring to David Macguigan. Other diatribe included the
phrase `the stupid Pope', and a colleague was referred to as
`a pestiferous bishop'. Anglicans are the most likable
Christians, I concluded, for they are hardly Christians at all.
  `An icicle formed in the cold air of the dining vault'. Half-
expecting that kind of night, I'd been quoting Under Milk Wood
to Sam in the car.
  In fact the Deanery, which was a part of the Abbey complex,
was a warm, spectacularly decorated priest's warren. Decor
included Richard the Lionheart's armour, and red tapestry
hangings from the fifteenth century. And the Dean, for all his
lack of charity to others, was pleasant enough to me.
  He was a small, dried-up man - but cocky, opinionated and
volatile. He was rather as I imagined Bertrand Russell to have
been, except for the swarthy (Desert Campaign) face, which was
surmounted by a shock of wry, Einsteinian hair.
  He sat us down under a portrait of Elizabeth 1, dated 1594,
and gave us oysters and white wine. I expected to be
overwhelmed by history and erudition, but he seemed more
interested in Australia than the Abbey. I was quite ignorant
of Australian cathedrals, about which he asked me a few
questions. The only one I'd ever set foot in was St Paul's in
Melbourne, where an aunt was once wed to Christ in a white
veil, in the time-on period of her life. I didn't talk about
my aunt, but elaborated, so far as memory permitted, on the
architecture of St Paul's. I rashly called it Norman, but after
I'd described its spire and half-remembered buttresses Dean
Goode said it was more likely Modern.
  I switched topics to spiritual cults. As well as looking like
an old bird, the Dean now started squawking like one,
ventilating his feelings towards `oriental charlatans' and
`Indian social climbers'. The Dean's religion, it seemed, was
nearly always framed in the negative.
  I disagreed here and there, mainly to keep the conversation
going, caring little about cults and not at all about religious
architecture.
  The three of us, partly thanks to the labours of the invisible
cook, had a reasonable time of it. After dessert I drank, for
the first time since my school Speech Day, a quantity of
sherry. Sam was fairly quiet, possibly a little overcome by her
father - who tended to gesticulate more as the evening went on.
  Eventually the movements subsided a little, and we were settled
before a big log fire in his with-drawing room, and told
stories from the Abbey's past.
  Henry IV had died in Jerusalem Chamber, `Through that door,
then down the old cloisters'. His son, Henry V, came to the
Chamber the same night and appropriated the crown. His father's
effigy, the Dean told me, was carved from heart of oak, with
a solid silver head.
  William Caxton had his printery in the Abbey, next to St Anne's
Chapel, and Edward IV would drop in to look at the presses from
time to time.
  During the Duchess of Northumberland's funeral in 1776, as if
that year wasn't bad enough, the front of St Edmund's Chapel
had collapsed. Three tons of iron, stone and timber had fallen
onto the congregation, he told me with a histrionic gleam in
his eye.
  Before coffee the Dean took us into the library. For my benefit
he removed a wall panel near the fireplace, revealing a ladder
leading upwards into a tunnel. Throwing a light switch, he
invited me to ascend.
  The ladder led me up to a small alcove. `Is this the internment
room?' I called.
  He ignored the question. Levity, it seemed, was on the Dean's
terms or not at all.
  `That is the room,' he stated. `where Atterbury and his friends
plotted the Jacobean invasion of England.'
  I climbed down again. `Who was Atterbury?'
  `He was an eighteenth century predecessor of mine.'
  `What happened to the invasion?'
  `Oh, the poor old chap was caught out,' he snorted. `They
arrested him in this house in 1722. He was exiled forever.'
  `Poor old Atterbury,' sighed Sam. `He's one of my favourite
Deans.'
  `Hmm. Well - he was careless.' He turned to me, `He's over by
the West Door now, with his wife. He did come back - in a
coffin.'
  These long-dead clerics were departed colleagues to him. One
could almost see him with them in 1722, discussing the falling
collections, or masonry.
  I noticed a hideous black object staring from the library wall.
  `Pitt's death mask,' he stated.
  I looked at it more closely. `Valuable, I'd imagine ...'
  `Not really. Fellow called Nollekens made six hundred of the
things. Rushed off to do the mould before Pitt was even cold,
then sold the casts to the gullible public. Made thousands of
pounds.'
  `Rather like the bloke who did the John Lennon memorial record.
It was in the shops within thirty-six hours of his death
apparently.'
  `Who?'
  `John Lennon. One of the ...'
  `Never heard of him.'
  The Dean strode off, leaving Sam and I to reciprocate looks.
  During coffee Dean Coode, now finally onto his favourite
subject, began to relax.
  `We are looking,' he began, his thin, bird-like mouth pursed
a little, a frail Second Empire cup balancing casually on his
knee, `We are looking at a mystical tradition which has its
seeds in eternity. England's! And that's why I'm intolerant of
those who leave so-called organised religion for the ambiguous
nonsense of the East.' A wrinkled hand swooped on the cup, and
he gulped some coffee. `Right here on our doorstep - literally
so at the moment - is knowledge which eclipses that available
from any other tradition. Westminster Abbey contains not just
the bones, and mistakes, of ambitious kings and prelates: it
holds direct information as to the nature of God himself.'
  `I don't recall gaining that impression when I looked round,'
I said bravely, thinking of Latin inscriptions, and dead stone
eyes.
  `You wouldn't have,' he answered. `You wouldn't have. And you'll
probably miss it again tonight. Nevertheless, my friend, it is
there.'
  He stood up. We stood up. There were grave farewells, as if a
great voyage were commencing. Sam and I departed. The evening
had ended dramatically.
  `What's going on?' I asked her, as we walked the nine-hundred-
year-old cloisters built by the Confessor for his faithful
monks. I was unsure of what I'd heard. Had there been more
Dark Insinuations - or simply a gratuitous religious lesson?
  `Father likes you.'
  `What do you two know that I don't?'
  `I know all three verses of the national anthem.' she
volunteered. It must have been the sherry: she started singing.

    `Scat-ter her enemies! 
    Con-found their knavish tricks! ... I think.'

  `Listen,' I insisted. `You alluded, when I last saw you, to
certain mysteries here ...'
  `Mysteries!' she sang to the empty cloisters. Mysteries!'
  I grabbed her hand, and it occurred to me she was not nearly
as tipsy as she made out. I held her still.
  `Please Sam.' She looked at me: the body wavered a little, but
the eyes did not. She took my other hand too, and we faced each
other like lovers.
  I spoke more calmly. `Your father. Now he's suggesting there's
more to this place than meets the eye.' We started walking
again, and I took a deep breath. `He could have been referring
to the ancient tradition of Anglican ... whatever. Or he could have
been supporting - unintentionally supporting - something you
started to tell me. Something a little more specific.'
  We reached the North Entrance where someone, it had been
arranged, would let us in. He did - a pleasant young verger.
Greeting Sam by name, he told us to enjoy ourselves.
  The lights were half-up, just short of eerieness, but
sufficient for our purpose.
  We ambled into Poets' Corner for the second time, and stopped.
`Aren't you going to tell me anything?' (I was standing on John
Keats.)
  She raised a finger to her lips. `Please wait a while.'
  She somehow managed to make me feel intrusive, so I kept quiet.
  Silently we made our way into the Confessor's Chapel in the
Ahbey's east. It was nearly midnight. A service had finished
not long before, and the candles were still smoking on Edward's
ancient vault.
  Sam knew the place as well as her own home. We passed into the
Chapel of Henry VII, tacked on to the Abbey's eastern extreme.
She led me here and there, in and out of smaller chambers, past
graves and plaques and enormous leadlight windows, wafting
ahead at times. We were completely alone. There was silence as
we at last stood at the centre of the enormous chamber, and
drank it in. The fan-vaulted ceiling arched high above us over
the crypt of Henry VII and his wife, Elizabeth of York. I
walked the black marble floor from tomb to tomb: Bloody Mary,
Elizabeth I ... Mary Queen of Scots. On one wall I examined
statues of St Matthew, wearing spectacles, and a bearded female
saint.
  `This place is so lifeless,' I breathed, when I'd rejoined her
in the centre of the Chapel. `Beautiful, but lifeless.'
  `You said that before ... It's true of course.'
  Everything in the Abbey had been dead so long it had taken on
the impersonality of stone. There was little remaining even of
death's forbidding splendour. It was all very grey.
  Sam began to move slowly, gently, about the Chapel: it was a
kind of dance, almost, and took me very much by surprise. She
swayed here and there for some minutes, and I glimpsed her face
every moment or two in the gloam. She wouldn't actually look
at me.
  I'd stepped over a low barrier into a kind of sanctuary, and
was watching her, fascinated, with my elbows resting on some
Tudor's shins. She looked over at last, then disappeared behind
a statue. Flirtation? No, the coyness had another message.
  Sam's character, it was already clear, was rather more
amorphous than mine: was always disclosing something
unexpected. Innocence, or strength ... more recently a dry and
satirical wit. 

