By Julie Wilder Anna Minter  


  "Let us take a moment to reflect on what Anna meant to us," said
Lawrence his voice sharp and unfaltering as he competed with
the roar of the buffeting surf. I stared down at the boat on
the shore and the four of us standing beside it as if it were
a monument. Dorothy scattered petals into the little craft but
the wind caught the delicate blooms scattering them across the
sand and into rock ledges. Was this how Anna would have wanted
it? No body, no church and no hymn singing. Out there on the
bay was her favourite spot where she sketched the coastline and
Lyndow harbour depicted in many of her paintings. A simple
service on a stormy day, when the sea turned treacherous with
unseen rip tides, unlike the calm, spring morning when they
presumed she'd slipped, likely hit her head and drowned.
  I prayed to a God that gave Lawrence no such comfort. Anna had
been the source of his revelation that religious belief was no
more compulsory than the wearing of his Sunday best suit. I
tolerated with reservations my son's conviction that shedding
antiquated superstitions had freed his mind. And to the group
of curious onlookers keeping their distance we must have made
an odd assortment; standards turned upside down by two world
wars couldn't change the stonewall attitude of the pious
pillars of our small community.
  Beulah McCannister, the sharp end of a spearhead duty bound to
uphold the town's moral well-being, stood among them tall and
erect like a creaking gate-post. Her seasoned funeral hat
pulled tight over her ears in an attempt to stop the wind
dislodging it, her thoughts glaringly reflected in bead-like
eyes and pinched lips.
  I turned away from her presumptuous judgment, for,
even as I viewed the simple farewell, Anna's death wasn't real
to me. Wouldn't she come breezing through the doors of Hill
House, her flaming red hair glistening salty wet, those green
eyes flashing anger at having waited in vain for her rescuers?
As her housekeeper and friend for the six years that she'd
lived among us, I acknowledged that through the eyes of some
she was a sinner, yet adored and loved by others she had cared
to touch. There were no labels to fit Anna.
  My Lawrence with his lame legs nearly as useless as spent
knicker elastic had been stunted more by stifled anger and
self-pity than his affliction. Anna had taught him to laugh,
and shown him that there were ways to jump fences other than
with two straight legs.
  That Dorothy was Beulah McCannister's child was apparent in her
plain features and straight-as-a-yard-of-pumpwater body. With
a future as clear as reflections in still water. She was
destined to fill her days behind the counter of her mother's
home-made cake shop. Until Anna, sensing a talent in Dorothy
that set her apart from ordinary folk, cast pebbles in the
pond.
  Beulah all but ate her fossilised hat when learning that
Dorothy was sneaking up to Hill House for painting lessons
whenever she could get away from the shop. An outraged Beulah
demanded the arrest of the immoral Bohemian as an unfit
influence on the young. Constable Rearden agreed to speak to
the hill woman, but Dorothy was no child in the eyes of the
law, and he wasn't empowered to arrest folk just for their
colourful ways; not even on Beulah's assurity that Anna Minter
ran a devil's workshop. With fiery, pulpit fervour Beulah
accused him of being blinded by provocative flesh. Constable
Rearden reddened to the length of his exposed neck for, defying
the theory that a woman over forty was past her best years,
Anna made an impressive figure.
  She was restrained by neither fashion or conformity. With the
war over women were speculating on a new-found freedom, though
respectable women didn't, as yet, flaunt their bodies the way
Anna did. I voiced my disapproval but she'd laugh the way she
always did at such reprobation and say, "I refuse to strangle
my finest attributes even for you, Esme Brock". Like a child
basking in attention, she encouraged the caustic glances
knowing that every healthy male in Lyndow had his spirits
lifted by the sight of her fluid proportions.
  Fuller Price, standing beside Lawrence, his bulky frame bent
low over his grief, had known such pleasure. He'd been taken
with Anna the day he came to repair the roof. His dark,
smouldering looks that most of the time hid what he was
thinking didn't conceal his admiration. And Anna saw no good
reason to discourage him.
  "You'd best watch yourself with that one," I told her. "He's
not been right since the time he spent in a German prisoner-
of-war camp."
  Fuller fixed the roof. He mended the fences and out-houses, and
by the time he'd finished no house was more painted and
repaired than Hill House. Yet the more startling was the
renovation of Fuller himself.
  Four years in German prison camps had deprived Fuller of more
than just his freedom. He'd gone to war with enough arrogance - 
you'd have thought he was about to change history all on his own.
Bitterness had replaced arrogance and there's nowhere for that
to go but eat away at your innards. Those that told him he was
lucky to be back in one piece found themselves fortunate if he
didn't up and knock them senseless. A carpenter by trade his
quick temper put paid to a regular job. These days he worked
for himself picking up the odd job here and there between bouts
of heavy drinking. Yet here he was sober, spruced up and shining 
like a choir boy.
  Though it was not my business how Anna worked a miracle on
Fuller, this transformation didn't escape the vigilant eye or
scornful tongue of Beulah McCannister who said, "Nature alone
would condemn the union between an old hen and a young
cockerel".
  The blinkered vision of Beulah and her cronies made them
incapable of seeing good where a grain of doubt remained to rub
noses in. If Anna broke the rules I was grateful that she'd
employed me as housekeeper when others were better qualified.
  "Give me a reason for employing you, Mrs Brock," said this
wisp of a woman with copper curls piled on top of her head like
one of those French tarts in a Moulin Rouge poster. Desperation
had brought me to Hill House on learning that a Miss Minter had
taken over the property and was advertising for a housekeeper.
I was a war widow of dwindling means with a crippled son to 
support, yet to evoke sympathy went against my dignity as a 
proud woman. The education my pastor father had thought so 
important was of little advantage for this position.
  "I've no credentials and no formal training," I said, "but I'm
honest and you'll not find a harder worker because that's
always been my way."
 Placing a cigarette in an ebony holder and slowly lighting it
she stared at me with scrutinising honesty. "I smoke more than
is good for me, I'm extremely untidy and I keep irregular
hours. How do you feel about that?"
  "Miss Minter, it's no concern of mine if you cavort across the
hills stark naked when the moon's full. You advertised for a
housekeeper not a nursemaid."
 To this Anna Minter threw back her brilliant head and laughed
so loud we were both at it.
  "Esme, I like your spirit. The job's yours but only if you call
me Anna."
  Our relationship, born out of mutual understanding and warm
humour, mellowed into friendship and my admiration for the
brash Anna. Yet it was her indestructible spirit that
distracted me from the true implication of events leading to
her drowning. Only once in those six years did she stray from
Lyndow. A few months before her untimely death she returned
from a short visit to the city. Though she rarely spoke of her
life before Hill House, I imagined that her low spirits were 
the result of some personal family matter. I had learned not 
to pry, knowing Anna to be tight-lipped when she had a mind to be.
  Her mood lifted and, as I perceived then, the last winter in
Hill House was little different to any other. Though I
maintained my cottage with Lawrence, he spent many long
evenings with Anna. Her passion for books, a passion imparted
to Lawrence, was evident in a house that fair overflowed with
the works of such writers as Joyce, Shaw and D.H. Lawrence.
They would discuss for hours the wonder of the written word.
How different was my son's outlook from his first meeting with
Anna when, chipping away with disarming humour, she slowly
demolished the defensive wall he'd so carefully built. If his
legs were at odds with the rest of him, his mind was clear and
eager for knowledge. When his head wasn't buried in one of
Anna's prized tomes, he was tapping at the old typewriter she'd
given him. No one was prouder than Anna when, having written
several articles that impressed the editor, Lawrence was
established on the local newspaper.
  Young Dorothy's regular visits to Hill House were no longer
furtive affairs since she'd informed her mother she'd never set
foot in the cake shop again if she wasn't allowed to continue
her lessons. It was a side to the timid girl I'd not seen
before, though I reckon it was always there just waiting for
enough fire to burst out.
  Only the relationship between Anna and Fuller changed. Their
spontaneous gaiety was replaced with a conspiracy that on
occasions seemed to weigh heavy on Fuller. Whatever pained them
Anna went out of her way to hide. She'd get all dressed up in
one of her gaudy dresses, with bangles and beads enough to
hear her coming, and take herself off to the market. I remember
Beulah McCannister remarking that good taste was no more than
three good pieces of jewellery. I could understand that, for
had Beulah worn more you'd have sworn her bones were rattling.
But frivolity was part of Anna's flamboyant nature as was her
return from the market ladened with flowers when there were
enough in the garden to fill the church hall.
  Yet there was this particular occasion when she arrived home
with no more than a faded, dog-eared book of love poems. So
engrossed was she in the musty, old book that not until I
brought in the tea-tray did she look up and say, "It's sad,
Esme, that such an intimate possession should end it's days
discarded with indifference".
  She reverently turned the wafer thin pages to reveal on the
inside cover a neat, handwritten inscription; To Sara my love,
David. I could sense Anna getting sentimental over this dusty 
relic that smelt like the cat had died and they'd forgotten 
to bury it.
  "If you picked that up from Gab Stein's stall you'd best scrub
your hands before tea. He's known to acquire his stuff from
some doubtful places," I warned, though Anna was already lost
in the flowery verses.
  It was about this time that Lawrence moved into a place of his
own. I missed him but he had his independence, and I could see
as how he was as happy as a pig in a mucky pen. A few days
after he'd moved to the rambling ground-floor flat, Anna,
nodding her head in approval at the sparsely furnished rooms,
presented Lawrence with a gift, her complete collection of
valuable and beloved books. Against his speechless gratitude
she said she would personally kick the sticks out from under
him if he didn't respect them the way she had. I was unprepared
for this extravagant gift, and my dumbfounded expression
prompted her to remark that at last she had succeeded in
getting my tongue to take a holiday. There was no doubt that the
overwhelming effect this disconcerting bequeathal had on Lawrence
and myself pleased and amused Anna immensely. 

