<sample>
	<id> P14 </id>
	


	<note> 2006 words </note>
	


	<source> Unsettled Areas </source>
	


	<h> Nuptials for pan </h>
	


	<bl> By David Myers </bl>
	

  no fool like an old fool, he thought and grinned. we're put here on earth
to repeat our most productive mistakes over and over. once more with feeling.
he would never have admitted it, but he was a happy man. three years of
midlife bachelorhood had not been what the playboy advertisements had promised.
he had fitted a sexy muffler to his car that gave off macho growls at the
traffic lights, he had worn a personalised medallion around his neck and
he had even oiled his chest hairs. but all to no avail. the centrefold bunnies
with the kinky underpants had not been drawn to him. no moths had flown
to his flame. he had drunk his brut champagne alone or at best with his
dog. he had become hypochondriac and diffident, feeling like a patriarch
who has been disgraced and driven from his tribe. but today he would return
from the desert of solitude and remarry. he would no longer be a pariah.
he stuck his head out the window and boomed in a tuneless but cheerful basso
profondo: get me to the church on time!
  he knows, he knows. a wedding is an exercise in self-deception. the
celebrants smile and carry flowers instead of daggers. but this is no proof
of peace. it is only a moment of nervous truce in a never-ending war of
the sexes. with marriage and divorce already behind him, he's full of useless
theories like this. but when did theory ever affect practice?
  it is summer midday at the end of the world. dust clouds ride in on desert
winds. hot and enervating. a belt of hills strains but cannot contain the
bulging belly of this provincial town. too much self-indulgence, he says.
he a bearded fitness freak in endless mid-life crisis escaping as usual
to the beach. he despises self-gratifying bellies. he loves the hardness
that comes from challenge. sport is his yoga of higher awareness. but his
intolerant credo has a flaw and he knows it. women. he is too scared of
women to seduce them and run. run back to the sports, camping and drinking
that he loves. too timid to be a don juan. he yearns to have a woman waiting
for him when he finishes one of his adventures. the way his mother had waited
when he was a tenny-bopper.
  he booms into song again. singing better than rechewing the cud of failure.
ebullient tones in the slipstream. i'm getting married in the morning. not
morning anyway but high noon. get me to the church on time. except it's
not going to happen in a church. they know what they can do with their church.
the anglican bishop he'd rung had almost yelped leper! unclean! when he'd
confessed he was divorced. what god had joined together, let no man put
asunder. lovely words but not to be taken literally. must be cautious or
religion can be inconvenient.
  no problems, there are other gods. poseidon, eros, pan. now there's a
holy trinity for you. surf, sex and potency. bound to win out against piety
and puritanism any time. so today a procession for hymen in midday sand-dunes
with flocks of randy satyrs cavorting and flashing on clifftops. eerie tones
from pan pipes and in the sea the thunder of poseidon, greatest surfy of
all time, galloping aloft foaming breakers. an amphibious blessing from
the gods of this life.
  but the priestess, almost as broad-minded as she is broad-hipped, is
nevertheless not into orgiastic myths. you can do what you like in the bedroom
dearie but don't do it in the streets because you'll frighten the horses.
she whinnied with delight at having got off one of her standard jokes so
early in the nuptials. all the world's a stage and the players' bodies should
be costumed, she continued. especially the bride's body. nowhere to pin
the orchids otherwise. and she shook with laughter all over again.
  back behind the steering wheel for a while yet. disciple of pan clad
temporarily only in department store loin cloth, standard issue, nylon with
pictures of shellfish and octopi. time for meditation. what's he seeking
aften then? sex with loyalty. he knows that this is an utopian dream, but
no more so than anything else worth having in life. he's tried being a bachelor
with a dog. but as his secretary, miss malaprop, said: there are some ways
in which a dog cannot service you. besides, he reasoned to himself, a woman
has by far the bigger vocabulary. and he yearned for sex with soul. marriage,
this time, would not be a millstone around his neck. more an anchor to stop
his habit of drifting off with the tides and winds.
  he was old enough now to take pleasure in pillow talk. pillow talk before
and after. a slim chance for honesty and intimacy. why does he need loyalty?
self-protection. he's getting old and doesn't fancy his chances in the sexual
salesrooms of the disco fleshpots anymore. competition from upmarket youth
is too intense. maybe a flesh auction instead? what am i bid for this arthritic
antique with a mind of his own? here's a special challenge for a handywoman
with vision.
  successful marriage was a matter of timing, he reflected vulgarly. a man
has got to sell himself before his commodity assets get overripe. there
are always facelifts, toupes, and capped teeth of course. also lunchtime
masseuses. but best of all: walk softly and carry a big cheque book. gustav
aschenbach resorted to blush and mascara for the moments that mattered.
but a man is better advised to retain some reserve in the pursuit of pleasure.
middle-aged men lust for loyalty. they can't get up to the old tricks they
used to do. the back seats of cars are more cramped than in youth's golden
days. the spirit is willing but the joints are stiff. now it's cushions
and double beds and small sighs of satisfaction.
  but don't give up hope. you can rejuvenate your marriage with our elementary
manual complete with stimulating pictures. an essential reference for every
do-it-yourself husband. no longer will you need help from the plumber or
the milkman. think of the pride you and your wife will feel in being
self-sufficient. enroll in our WEA class now: SEX FOR THE SENILE. you may
be forty but your heart is still sporty. let the experts teach you how to
get fun out of your own personalised perversions. there's no need to flash
in the park or flagellate. learn how to do it properly in a WEA course in
your community centre.
  back to loyalty. people work so hard for it and then they're miserable
when they've got it. disillusioned by conjugal duties. the blokes at work
are all into blue movies. hard-core porn before breakfast in the janitor's
basement office. you've got to have a good digestive system but it puts
your lust in perspective.
  the clay and rock track to the beach is a boneshaker. the signpost is
salted white with dust and peppered with bullet holes. it almost says waitpinga
beach. sun is high, sky an unreachable dome of eggshell blue, dust swirls
settle in the sleepy air. a brown river slides through swamps and reeds
to the sea. orange sandhills look like burnt meringues just out of the oven.
green swells roll in with stories from the south pole. they thunder in a
whirlpool of froth and sandbank. backstage right a bombora surf is a necklace
of sharks' teeth in a turquoise sea. romance on the beach, just begging
for it. splendour in the ultraviolet. but incorruptible the council sign:
freak waves claim lives. this coast is dangerous. the voice of prudence
immortalised in black letters on a white board. you have been warned. you
die at your own risk. just the place for a surf and a wedding. the same
principle as tossing witches into the village pond.
  time to prepare in honour of the bride. in the squeaking sand the soles
of his feet burn. wriggle deeper into the cool sand below. but keep your
mind on the here and now. not the moment for time warps to a past of what-ifs
and might-have-beens. there might have been ghosts hiding in the crevices
of the stone church. erotic ghosts. he always seems to be at least one love
affair behind himself. preoccupied with daydreams of old flames, he can
never quite kindle a fullblooded fire in the present. must be disconcerting
for the current lady love. to know she has to be got rid of before he can
give her his full attention. but the beach will change all this. the seagulls
catch ghosts and daydreams in daring swoops and gobble them down in midflight.
the seagulls live in the here and now. and the heavens are blue and gold
with festive innocence.
  human innocence is reborn in action. all the world's a stage but we still
need props. a wonky card-table on the top of a sandhill. transformed by
a bali batik featuring rama and sita. a story of love and war in a blaze
of pagan colour. no christian allegory here. this is a wedding for beachbums,
hippies, bohemians and disciples of gauguin. the marriage will be consummated
in every position except the missionary position in the holy presence of
the seagulls.
  there hadn't been much holiness about the divorce courts. it was a no-fault
divorce they said, though her counsel tried to prove him a lecherer, a
perverter of lolitas, a wife-basher and child hater. ah well, better than
a pederast or a wanker. just give me one of the kids and half the bourgeois
loot, your honour, and i won't be troubling you with the filthy details.
you ass, said his counsel, don't you know when a woman gets divorced, it's
as though all her birthdays had come at once.
  and here he was getting hitched again. we are doomed to repeat our first
mistakes. he explained this to his friends, his taxation accountant and
his lesbian lawyer. we cannot refrain from life just because we are sour
with experiene. let's dip ourselves back into the lollypot again and hope
for a thick sugar coating.
  a column of dust rises from the road and heralds the bridal procession. 
four or five old bombs broadside and wheely around the last curve. no silent 
limousines, no poker-faced chauffeurs, no christian ministrants. instead
instant hullabaloo. the extras jump out, - a catholic carnival of brothers,
sisters and cousins. babies begin tunnelling into sandhills like ant-lions.
stooped grandmas and great aunties with walking sticks gaze in dismay up at the
bali altar on the crest. still more cousins spill over the stage like acrobats,
somersaulting down to the high tide mark where they paddle awaiting further
direction. finally the bride's father, resplendent with sunburnt face and
a mane of white hair, is hoisted up in his wheelchair and borne aloft to
centre stage. his entry adds a touch of ballet to this interdisciplinary
performance.
  the bride and her flowergirl flaunt coquettish ankles as they step out
onto the heat of the beach. the bride's parasol in apricot lace twirls above
her dark curls in which flowers have been twined. her waves of dark hair
toss in harmony with the cresting surf. her apricot silk dress flutters
shyly in the breeze. to the anglo-saxon groom she is exotic because she
is of mediterranean origins with a dash of persian merchant passing through
zagreb a few centuries ago. she is striving to fight back her tears.
  why tears? a dim folk awareness of her role as reluctant bride perhaps.
a dutiful daughter stolen from her parents' tent and ravished by some
infatuated sheik of araby. brutal of course but advanced enough to believe
in foreplay. or had this sheik, smelly but rich, haggled for her semitic
sister over innumerable turkish coffees? a final price of five camels, ten
goats and a pig for goodwill. 


</sample>
