<sample>
	<id> P15 </id>
	


	<note> 2011 words </note>
	


	<source> Unsettled Areas </source>
	


	<h> The junkman </h>
	


	<bl> By Kevin Roberts </bl>
	

  Just another no-hoper, they said when they saw the junkman on his horse
and cart shambling down Gold Dust Way at noon, past the empty stone buidings,
the boarded up hotels and the broken down Goldbreak Opera House. The saying,
`Future of Gold', was carved into the crumbling entrance of the Goldbreak
Opera House. But the gold went up somewhere years ago in a willy-willy,
and so did the people and the mines. The town was derelict except for the
Gladhand Mine. Full of unused Victorian buildings, Goldbreak sat for no
good reason anymore in the middle of gibber plains, where even the railways
had sent men years ago to pull up the rusty nails and ties. Only the Railway
Hotel remained.
  The junkman walked his horse slowly down Gold Dust Way. His dirty grey-white
mare, hips as sharp as plowshares, blinkers over its sad brown eyes, had
an old slouch hat on its swaying head.
  Squatting on the verandah of the Railway Hotel, Digger was offended by
the sight of those two horse ears, one up, one down, jauntily supporting
the slouch hat. Diggers' beer belly quivered in indignation at the sight.
  `I didn't fight for Aussie in two big ones just to see me national bloody
emblem go on a bloody junkman's horse!' he snorted. But Curly Chalmers from
the Gladhand was buying lunch in the Railway Hotel and called out, so Digger
slipped into the bar and the issue just as easily slipped his mind after
the first pint.
  The fourwheeler rolled on down the street, dust goblins dancing at the
feet of the mare and in the wake of the four wooden-spoked rubber tyres.
It was very quiet, the cart and the town noiselessly merging, not even a
squeak from the cart. Above clung dark clouds, heavy as Golden Syrup. Apart
from a guffaw from the Railway Hotel now and then it was like everybody
was too tired, too worn out with living in Goldbreak or too cranky to notice.
Everybody was as bored as the dark slag heaps about the town, as if all
the good human metal had been mined too, and there was nothing but traces
of colour left, or a momentary show of light among the dead heaps of potch.
  But this junkman was different. He slouched forward over the loose reins
and a kind of woollen poncho, maybe red or covered in red dust from the
gibber plain, hung like a tent over his whole frame. He kept his head down
so you couldn't see his face for his broad-brimmed black hat. But I was
a kid and curious and I ran out to have a look. He raised his head a little
to observe me standing there with my hand shading my eyes. He was between
me and the sun and a great fiery haze surrounded his head. I couldn't see
too much except for reddish long hair and a red beard and green eyes, big
ones, and a thin gaunt face. His skin wasn't red though. It was a kind of
look-through skin, one you got the idea might be like potch if you just
turned it to the light the right way and got a shot of green or blue or
yellow fire. He didn't smile or say anything though I yelled, `Good-day!'
But he kept looking at me intently, swivelling his head backwards a bit
as the cart moved slowly past. I wasn't alarmed or frightened though. There
was something comfortable in that tired face.
  I could see Mary Collins over the street at the Modern Cafe looking out
over the pies and pasties, wiping her hands on her apron in her nervous
desperate way and staring at the junkman as he went by. And it was just
as well Digger Rampart didn't see Liz Drogemuller, not that she gave him
the time of day, looking out from the Commercial Hotel, looking down her
long nose in her superior way. She stepped right out from the Main Entrance
and shaded her eyes so her big bust stood out even more. They said she was
too proud for Goldbreak but not proud enough to leave it. When the men wanted
to fire Digger up, they told him she pulled off men for $20 in her room
at the back of the Commercial Hotel after closing. Digger would froth at
the mouth at that and slink about the town gnashing his teeth like a dingo
with rabies.
  Not that the junkman noticed either of the women. He just went gliding
by with his dirty white horse and his noiseless cart with black plastic
tied over a series of humps and lumps and bulges criss-crossed with white
nylon rope. He went gliding on and on until he ended up a black spot shimmering
like glass in the heat a mile or two out of town, like it was all pre-arranged,
like he knew, and the town knew somehow, he would stop by the big rusted
corrugated iron shed next to the mine tailings of the deserted Humdinger
mine shaft.
  Of course it was the perfect spot for him. Anybody coming into town that
way would pass by. And from the other direction, it wasn't too far for some
of the sheep station people or the half a dozen wheat farmers or the handful
of people left in Goldbreak to drive out in their Holdens to have a look.
The junkman had no need to advertise. Even though I thought no one was looking,
they'd all seen the black plastic and there were any number of guesses about
what was under it. Rumours of stolen goods. New mine equipment. Someone
said the junkman was about to start up Humdinger Mine again now the price
of gold had topped $200. Farm equipment. A foundry. Bootlegger. Casino.
Anything that people wanted to do themselves, the junkman was about to do.
Any scheme they'd nursed for years for Goldbreak, the junkman had in mind,
too. The rumours flew, squawking like a flock of galahs from waterhole to
waterhole, pub to pub, bed to bed.
  I was right in on it. I'd been the closest. I'd seen his face. Spoken
to him. Mary offered me a two-day old pie with sauce and questioned me about
his looks as she tore the label off a Rosella tomato sauce bottle in little
strips. Liz Drogemuller gave me a Nestle's milk chocolate bar with only
one edge gone white from the heat. She wanted to know about his hands as
well. I told her they were thin and bony. She bent over to ask me if he
was wearing rings on his fingers and I couldn't answer for a second or two
because the front of her dress fell full open and I could see a great brown-pink
circle pressing against the black lace and my voice kept breaking. I had
to say no. No rings. No rings. I said it a couple of times like a galah
before she stood up and raised her superior nose and looked far down the
road to where the Humdinger shed stood shimmering in the haze.
  Digger brought us the first piece of news about him the next morning.
`He's a bloody septic. Quiet bloke though. He's got a sign up there. Says
he's going into business. Gotta grinder and an anvil and a soldering iron
and stuff. Repairs. That's all it says. Just &quot;Repairs&quot;. Yeah, and this circle
cut by an S. Half black and half white. Some hippy sign. Look. He gave me
the slouch hat off his horse. Bloody thing even fits me. It says Khe Sanh
on the inside. But that's a Vietnam issue. I bet that hippie bastard was
never there. Prabably flogged it in a pub! All I gotta find is a rising
sun and an emu feather and Jake's your uncle!'
  Now everybody in the town was interested, but they weren't going to go
running off to see a newcomer right away. Especially if he was a Yank.
Especially if his sign had only one word. No. Goldbreak might not have T.V.,
but we'd all been to Southern Cross, and a few people had been to Kalgoorlie,
and even Perth, so we weren't country bumpkins by a long shot. So we bided
our time. 
  `How's he going to make a living around here?' worried Mary.
  `I wonder if he can fix electric kettles?' Liz asked me. I didn't know,
but it was one of those questions you don't really have to answer.
  `He'll be gone in a week,' laughed Curly Chalmers. `With all your good
stuff, too, if you leave it with him. You can't trust dole-bludgers! How
they let him in the country beats me!'
  But the sign stayed up. And any day you could see the people of Goldbreak
go to and fro like a line of ants when they're onto a good thing, walking
out of the shadows of the town into the bright barren shimmer of the gibber
plain to the iron shed with the Repairs sign on it. They carried all the
old and broken things with them, the women in particular, hoping to get
some further use out of an old clock, or hoping to repair a wedding present
or something they'd loved. The junkman rarely disappointed them.
  `It's amazing,' said Digger from his perch on the Railway Hotel verandah.
Somehow the junkman reached into his boxes and found just the right knob,
the exact handle, the one electric element the bloke in Southern Cross said
didn't exist. He found the right size belt, the proper fuse, the one bolt
or nut that fitted, the little screw, the uncracked lens, the curved lever
with a 7/16th hole in one end, the spigot with the right thread, the zipper
that zipped up, the buckle that would fit, the snap that fastened, the washer
that held, the wing nut that would not come off.
  And if by some miracle the junkman didn't have it, after rummaging about
in wooden boxes, he would make it, there and then. He'd take some metal
or a part and work with his quick hands quietly to fashion something that
would do.
  The wives of Goldbreak heaved sighs of relief again and again, thrifty
souls, when their vacuum cleaners or their favourite appliance, ones their
husbands had been promising to get around to fixing for months or years,
was put back into their grateful hands, renewed, working, and complete.
  If the men grumbled a bit when they extolled the junkman's virtues, the
women bore it. And if the men yelled when their lamb chops and spuds were
five minutes late because they'd rushed something down to the junkman to
have fixed at the last minute, the women gave back as good as they got,
and the men grew quickly to resent anyone who could do so many things so
well with his hands.
  It came to a head on the Saturday night. When the husbands met for a beer,
they all discovered they'd been shortchanged that week by their wives. One
by one they revealed the preoccupation their wives had with getting old
junk fixed. Their meals had been late. They'd had to take off their own
boots, make their own tea, run their own baths. A great fury grew among
them as they drank, fuelled by the collective indignities they'd suffered.
`Over-paid, oversexed and over here!' they muttered.
  When the pub shut and the men staggered home it was as if with one hand
they picked up crockery in the kitchen and flung it out into Gold Dust Way.
Plate and cup and bowl. Their wives tearful or stony eyed, watched in their
dressing gowns. The rest of the town awoke to the thunderous crash and the
great shout, as if with one voice, the men cried in righteous fury. `Let
the Yank bastard fix that bloody lot for you!' and stumbled off to fall
dead asleep in their beds.


</sample>
