<sample>
	<id> R02 </id>
	


	<note> 2001 words </note>
	


	<source> Pushed from the wings </source>
	


	<bl> By Ross Fitzgerald </bl>
	


	<h>4 The Recruit </h>
	

`Hop in the car, lad.  We'll go somewhere quiet for lunch.'  Grafton didn't
demur at being called lad.  After all, Mr Horton had been his biology teacher.
He didn't look any older than Grafton remembered him at school - thin, erect,
thick black glasses, curly hair.  Grafton wondered why Mr Horton, not the
principal, had met him, and why he'd come all the way out to Tullamarine.
    `Are there still catacombs under the school?'  Grafton had to stop himself
consciously from saying `Sir'.  During the war Forest Hill High had been
taken over by American Intelligence.
    `We've been keeping tabs on you lad,' said the master, ignoring Grafton's
question.  `You've done remarkably well in the last few years.  Even though
you were hopeless at science, in many ways you're a credit to the School.'
Mr Horton had a goitre on the throat, a slight tremor of the hands.  His
eyes were, as ever, hypnotic.  In class, when Mr Horton commanded, Grafton
had always obeyed.
    Complaining about the standard of present-day road users, the master
drove direct to the Naval and Military Club in Little Collins Street.  Grafton
was glad he'd worn his wedding suit and a tie.  Without asking, Mr Horton
ordered a carafe of wine for himself and a freshly-squeezed orange juice
for Grafton.
    A stern portrait of Sir William Slim clutching a riding crop looked
down on their table for two.  Over roast beef, horse radish sauce and gravy,
with two potatoes each, followed by hot apple pie and custard, the teacher
talked while Grafton listened.  Lithe Mr Horton, Grafton noticed with chagrin,
wolfed down his food.  It hardly seemed fair!
    `&quot;Function never purpose&quot; you used to say,' Grafton recalled.
    Mr Horton smiled warmly.  `I'm glad you remember, lad.  A limb has a
function not a purpose.  Like human beings.'  Grafton checked himself from
saying that he remembered but didn't agree.  He was about to mention teleology
when Mr Horton bent over and took him by the arm.
    `Education is shot to pieces.'  There were tears in his eyes.  `Ours
is the only school in Victoria where a bright poor boy can get a quality
education.  And now,' he said severely, `the Socialist Left want to put
an end to that.  They want to stop us being selective, from picking the
cream.  They're biding their time - but legislation will be passed within
the year.
    `Radicals, blacks, women.'  The master thumped the table with his fork.
`The country's in chaos.  There are even ten women teachers at School.'
Grafton shook his head in disbelief.  `What's worse, they're here to stay
- it's the thin edge of the wedge.'
    Over coffee and more wine for himself, Mr Horton preached Anglo-Saxon
racial superiority and evolution by natural selection.  His views were still
the same: `Men and the white races are superior in intelligence to blacks
and women.  That's a fact.  Eysenck's right, but it's still not fashionable
to believe him.  There are actual differences in brain structure.  Read
E.O. Wilson's Sociobiology,' he added, as if talking to a Fourth Form class.
    `Aborigines are primitive palaeolithic savages.  That's what they are.'
There wasn't a trace of anger in his voice.  `They're savages.  They can
do things I can't do,' he patiently explained.  `Live in the desert while
Burke and Wills starved to death.  They are perfectly adapted to a nomadic
existence, but they are not fit to live in advanced technological society.
Why can't people see that?  Yet the Federal Government pours in money and
mining royalties.  Some of those poor black beggars get $40,000 each in
the Northern Territory.  And land grants!  They've got no concept of ownership,
yet soon someone in the &quot;Nigger's Gazette&quot; - the Melbourne Age - will suggest
we give them the top half of Australia.  That's democracy at work.'
    Mr Horton topped up his glass.  `Tony Bubcock is right - they should
all be sterilized.  In world history, democracy is a freak condition.  A
freak and pathological condition,' he emphasized, nursing his drink.  `If
this country is to have any hope, we need firm government.  Preferably a
dictatorship.  By those intent on upholding standards.'  Mr Horton clearly
meant what he said.  `The masses aren't fit for decision-making.  To believe
the reverse is insane.
    `The blacks are like the masses.  Some people have evolved as slaves.     
Yet in our system they're gaining control.  Even though she's a woman, that's
one of the things Thatcher understands.  That's why she's been returned
for a third term.  All the masses are fit for is to be made into catfood.
People can't see that either.'  He shook his head.  `They don't understand
about excellence.  The world's falling apart.  Instead of keeping cretins
on welfare, so they can kill good people by driving drunk, their brains
should be put in paraldehyde and wired up to a central computer that will
simulate rape scenes or high-speed motor chases or whatever stimulates 
their proletarian fancies.  They want to be happy,' he continued with 
disdain.  `Well let them be happy.  Then those of us who are concerned
about excellence can get on with the job.'
    It seemed a novel idea.  Grafton wondered why Mr Horton would keep
their brains at all.  No doubt he had his reasons.
    The biology master leant forward.  `Forest Hill is the best High School
in Australia.'  Grafton looked around the long grey dining room.  The only
other occupants were two elderly men huddled together at the far end.  `Thirty
per cent of teachers in your Matric year are now at tertiary institutions.
Thirty per cent,' Mr Horton emphasized.  `I could have gone myself, if I
hadn't chosen to stay.'
    `I've always wondered why you didn't leave,' responded Grafton,
deferentially.
    `I had more important work to do, Everest.'  The master looked him straight
in the eye.  `I still do.  You know, Everest,' he said very loudly, `you'd
be nothing without the School.  Nothing.  A lot of teachers put in a great
deal of work on you:  Mr Warnock - he's dead.  Mr Dumbrell - he's a Reader
at Monash.  And myself.  Myself most of all.'
    `I know that, sir,' said Grafton, accepting a second helping of pie and
custard.  `I'm very grateful.'
    `Gratitude, Everest, needs to be demonstrated by action.'
    `I'm not sure what you ...?'
    `Aren't you concerned,' the master exclaimed even more loudly, `about
the state of this country?  About the blacks and radicals?  About the general
lack of tone?  I know you are,' he said.  `I've read your PhD.  Your syntax
is beautiful.  Mr Fox would be proud of you.'  He lit a cigarette, sucked
in deeply.  `I'll come straight to the point.  There's work for you to do.
Important work.'
    Grafton tried to question him, but Mr Horton motioned silence.  Sir
William Slim looked frowningly down.  Grafton obeyed.
    `I'm going to tell you a secret.'  Mr Horton lifted his fork.  `But
let it be clearly understood, the secret is inviolable.  Do you understand?'
His fat body trembling, Grafton said he did.  `I usually recruit while they're
still at school,' Mr Horton continued.  `I've kept a dossier on every boy
we've taught.  Know their strengths and weaknesses.  Good points.  Bad points.
Although you were promising, you were unstable; too easily influenced. 
Disliked facts.  No good at maths.  And you used to drink too much.'
    Mr Horton wagged a long finger. `You drank at school: with David Pelthem,
in the catacombs, beneath the principal's office.  David killed himself,
poor lad.  Took an overdose two years after he left school in Fourth Form.
Died the very day you were doing your Matric exams in the Exhibition
Buildings.'  Mr Horton shook his head, grieving.  `Pretty boy.  You and
he were very close.'
    `I didn't know you knew,' Grafton said wistfully.
    `But now you've steadied down.  Finished your PHD.  Got married.  Appear
on the media.  How long is it since you stopped drinking?'
    `Nine years,' answered Grafton proudly.  `One day at a time.'
    `That's the main reason I've changed my mind,' confided Mr Horton. 
`Your sobriety has tipped the balance.  Any children on the way?' he added.
    `We're hoping to start a family soon,' said Grafton anxiously.
    `Well don't try too hard,' advised Mr Horton, putting down his fork.
`If you want my advice, just act as if nothing was going to happen.  And
it will.'
    `What were my good points?' Grafton asked, eagerly changing the subject.
    `They're still the same.  One - you're persistent, like a dog with a
bone.  And two - you're loyal.  Loyalty is most important,' the master said
sagely.  `That's why I know you'll do what I ask.'
    Grafton reached for a mint chocolate.  `What do I have to do?'
    `Just as you're told.'  Mr Horton gazed at him directly.  His large
gold fillings flashed as he smiled.
    `But what about Bowen?'
    `You'll keep your lectureship.  It's where you're needed now.  In the
long term, lad, there's no future in universities, you must know that. 
Tertiary education is shot to pieces.  But for the moment your position
is important to us.  There's going to be trouble at the Free-Enterprise
World Symposium.  You predicted so yourself - on TV,' he continued with a
smile.  `If I may say so, that was fortuitous.'
     `But I believe it,' said Grafton.  `Boss Hagan and the Queensland People's
Party are fascists.  He's an awful, repulsive man.'
     `Boss Hagan,' said Mr Horton, quaffing another glass of red, `is an
idiot.  He's expendable.  What's more, he's playing right into the hands
of the Left.  He's not a conservative's bootlace.  He's a right-wing populist.
A man of the masses.  Excellence means nothing to him.  In the whole scheme
of things Premier Hagan doesn't count.
      `The real danger,' Mr Horton said earnestly, `lies in the International
White Left.  Marxists and Trotskyites will try to use the Blacks.  To
manipulate the Aborigines for their own insidious ends.  Your university
is riddled with radical Leftists.  It's a cauldron.  Whereas the Symposium
is a symbol -  of development and our unfettered free-enterprise way of
life.  Apart from Tony Bubcock and Sir Brian Boyce, the bauxite magnate,
there'll be many heads of sympathetic states present - Singapore, Hong Kong,
New Zealand, the Seychelles, Swaziland, Korea, Kuwait.  And of course, to
open the conference the King and his handsome young Queen will be there.
     `If there's going to be trouble, and there will be,' the master
emphasized, `we want to direct it - in the right way; if necessary reinforce
and accentuate it.  FEWS takes place at the El Dorado indoor Conference
Centre.  It's right next to Bowen.  After FEWS Bowen gets to keep the entire
complex - for renting.  That and the proposed subsidy from Bubcock's mining
multinational will save the University.  The official opening's to be at
the King Charles III Memorial Stadium, also right next door.  So we need
you at Bowen, to stay in place, to make contact.
     `Since 1959,' Mr Horton confided, `we've established a network of
concerned Old Boys.  And installed them in key positions.  The Head of the
Atomic Energy Commission ...'
     `Sir Peter ...?' said Grafton, amazed.
     `That's right.  And the Director of ASIO - though he's of little use
now.  Plus the Commonwealth Ombudsman.  I recruited them all in Fifth Form.
Queensland has two contacts - both very powerful.  One is in Government.
The other ...' Checking himself, Mr Horton poured another glass of wine.
     `Your immediate control will be through the Office of National
Assessments.  Despite all the fuss, it's where real intelligence power lies
since the Hope Report.  Barry Ian, the new Director-General, is a friend
of mine.'
     `And an Old Boy?' Grafton asked in awe.
     `And an Old Boy,' responded Mr Horton.  `Sometime after you return to
Queensland your contact will make himself known.  I think you'll be surprised
when he does.'
     Grafton, surprised enough already, thought of a hitch:  `But if I don't
get tenure, I won't be at Bowen.  The federal bureaucrats want to unload
as many academics as they can. 


</sample>
