By Patsy Rowe CHAPTER THREE YER BLOODY INSURED, AREN'T YER?  

  I was on my way out to the portable loo one hot September
morning when I became aware of the fact that I could smell it
from the front terrace. It occurred to me that probably all the
neighbours could too, so I  hopped in the car and drove to the
supermarket.
  When I got back, I went out armed with a bucket of disinfectant 
and soapy water, a hanging "sweet smell" thing to purify the air, 
toilet paper (I was really sick of the newspaper we'd been having 
up to date) soap, paper hand-towels and a plastic nail-brush.
  I was surprised when the builder told me that the men objected
to the changes.
  "I just had a dekko at the loo, Patsy - bit lairy isn't it?"
  "What on earth do you mean `lairy'? It's simply clean!"
  "Yeah well, I'll give yer the drum Patsy, the boys reckon yer
havin' a shot at 'em."
  "A shot at them - whatever do you mean by that? I have to use
the toilet too you know, Charlie, and it's been quite unpleasant 
especially now that the weather's getting warmer. Tell the boys 
it's all the more reason for them not to take the newspaper in 
there to read. If they find it so `lairy' they can just pop in 
and out quickly."
  We didn't discuss the toilet any more after that, but since
the lock on the door was broken, most of the men made a point
of singing loudly or whistling while they were in there, so I
wouldn't walk in on them. They seemed to be a modest lot.
  The following day, as I waited for the whistling to stop so I
could use the loo, I noticed a truck backing up the drive.
There was a mop of curly hair hanging out of the driver's
window. I ran towards the truck...
  "Excuse me, oh, excuse me, please!"
  The truck kept backing towards the house. The painter who was
up on the ladder putting the finishing touches to the made-to-
measure drainpipes stopped working, and looked down the drive.
  "Cripes, 'es pretty close on the left there, isn't he?"
  "He's pretty close everywhere," I remarked.
  As I spoke, there was a crunch as the back of the truck went
into the side of the portable loo; my floral hand-towels and
matching toilet paper shot skywards. The truck still kept
coming relentlessly backwards.
  "Excuse me, hello there, excuse me..." I was shouting above the
noise of the engines and the beeping of the reversing horn,
but I had to jump sideways as the corner of the truck hit the
house with such force that the painter toppled to the ground.
So did the paint. All over the bricks. People appeared from
everywhere and there was a lot of yelling and cursing. I
couldn't believe that this man had really hit the house - all
that work, and only just finished minutes before. The paint
wasn't even dry.
  The driver got down from the truck and sauntered around to the
back where I was standing.
  "Excuse me, but couldn't you see me standing here, signalling
you to stop?" I asked.
  "Yeah, sure I saw yuh. What do you think I am, some kind of
prize mug that can't drive 'is truck 'imself. I tell yuh, lady,
the day I gotta let some woman tell me how to drive me truck's
the day I give the bloody game away."
  "Well," I said, giving him one of my teacher looks, "it could
well be that day is here."
  Everyone had stopped yelling. It was very quiet. The driver
took a comb from his top pocket and started running it through
his hair.
  "Anyway, keep yer shirt on lady, yer bloody insured, aren't
yer?"
  This matter of being insured was frequently brought to my
attention by the men. Whenever they broke something, they would
always remind me, "Not to worry luv, yer insurance'll cover
it."
  One morning, Peter, the apprentice plumber, was installing the
elaborate porcelain, hand-painted basin which had arrived from
France six months earlier but had only just been cleared by
customs.
  "Tell yer wot," he informed me jovially, "it's a bloody
bottler Patsy. I've never seen nothing like it."
  I was flattered. "Yes, you're right. It is lovely isn't it.
There are porcelain taps to match, you know."
  "Go on, I reckon that'll set yer back a bit."
  "Yes, by the time I bought all the accessories, it was a lot
of money. But, you only build a house once, and I think they're
all worth it."
  "I reckon," he agreed warmly.
  Ten minutes later I heard a crash.
  I hurried into the guest bathroom to see the porcelain basin
neatly divided in two.
  "Whatever happened? How did it break?"
  "Jeez, Patsy, the hole for the tap fittings wasn't big enough
and I didn't reckon it was worth shaving it out with the rasp
like I did the other one or I'd be here all day, so I thought
I'd just sort of chip it a bit bigger yer know. Whole thing
just went. But yer insured aren't yer...?"
  Despite the disaster, I couldn't help having a soft spot for
young Peter. One of his problems was that he could never seem
to find the right tool.
  Every morning followed the same pattern. He'd rummage through
his army disposal box, mumbling to himself, pull out a basin
spanner, put it back, sigh; pick up a shifting spanner, look
at it, sigh again. It seemed that the tool he wanted was never
there.
  One morning, I could contain myself no longer.
  "Good heavens, Peter, what's the matter?"
  "I need my pipe bender. I must have left it up at the
Turramurra job where I was yesterday."
  "Isn't that thing there a pipe bender?"
  "Yeah, but I need a 12 mm. That's a 20 mm."
  "Is there nothing else you can use instead?"
  "Not really."
  "Peter, I don't want to appear critical, but it seems to me
that you never have what you need."
  He looked so downcast, I felt mean. "Look, I'll tell you what
we'll do. Why don't we make a list of the jobs you're doing
here tomorrow and make sure you've got all the tools you'll
need."
  Squatting on the floor of the laundry, we went through his tool
box together. From time to time he'd whoop. "Me multigrips!
I've been lookin' for them little fellas for weeks!" We emptied
the box, and found that the bottom was rusty, so I lined it
with some leftover Contact to make it easier for him to keep
clean. "A good workman is only as good as his tools," I told
him, quoting my father's words to me. "You won't know yourself
when we've finished, Peter."
  It turned out that it wasn't really his tool box, but a spare
one the boss kept, which he'd lent Peter after his had been
"swiped" up on the Turramurra job. Peter was saving up to get
engaged to Coral, his seventeen year old girl-friend, and
didn't want to part with precious savings right now for a new
one.
  A lot of the tools were dirty, so I wiped each one clean before
handing it to Peter, who put it neatly in the right row. We
made some name tags with a Dymo and stuck them beside each tool
so he knew where it belonged. Actually, he had just about
everything he ever seemed to be looking for - it was really a
matter of laying his hands on it. I typed a list of tools for
him to paste inside the lid of his box, so that he could refer
to it and know in an instant what he had.
  Peter was delighted.
  Even so, next morning, I could hear him from the bathroom,
mumbling to himself again.
  "Don't tell me you can't find something in that beautifully
clean box of yours!"
  "Someone's taken me footprints!"
  I looked at the list inside the lid. It did seem that the
footprints were missing.
  "Who was using Peter's box yesterday?" I called out, "and
didn't put his footprints back again?"
  A chorus of "Not me's" echoed through the empty rooms.
  "Well, somebody has - they didn't just walk off. It's bad enough
borrowing Peter's tools but you could at least put them back.
It's not fair. Poor Peter can never find anything!"
  It was Morning Tea Time though, so the mystery of the missing
footprints was shelved for the moment.
  This was to be our first day of sitting down to Morning Tea
together properly. Up till now, Morning Tea had been quite
disorganized, with all the men stopping work at different
times. Dino, the Italian tiler, a jaunty little fellow who was
in a constant state of excitement, liked to have his coffee at
7.30 a.m. as soon as he arrived on the job. Mr San Fillipo, the
cabinet-maker, who was Dino's cousin, liked to stop at eight
when he immersed himself in the thickest salami sandwich I've
ever seen. Jock, the soccer-playing Scot, never knocked off
before 8.30 for his cup of tea, while Klaus and Kurt, the
blonde brothers from Cologne, preferred to break about nine.
At first, it didn't seem to matter if they all had their
Morning Tea in this staggered fashion, but I soon saw problems.
  One morning, there was a heated argument between Kurt and
Didier, the French plumber from Marseilles. Didier wanted a
section of timber cut out so he could install some copper
pipes; Kurt had just sat down for Morning Tea and told Didier
he'd have to wait. Didier couldn't go on with anything else
until this was done, and since he'd already had his Morning
Tea he was furious at having to cool French heels for half an
hour.
  Seeing this, I suggested it might be more efficient if we sat
down and had Morning Tea together. We could choose a time which
suited everybody. I thought nine o'clock seemed appropriate,
as by then everybody was on the job and had, hopefully, done
a couple of hours work.
  I was pleased that this seemed to meet with general approval
because it gave me an opportunity to go round and discuss
everyone's plans for the day; and, of course, what tools would
be needed.
  "Now, Dino, how are you off today for cement? Plenty of
sand? Did you find what you were looking for yesterday to do
the corners with? It's broken - well, why don't I get you
another one this morning when I'm up at Lumby's?"
  One of the reasons I preferred to do the shopping myself was
that I was able to buy things at the best price. I opened an
account at Lumby's, and told the manager I was Site Supervisor
on Lot 101, and would be interested in buying at "trade" - this
made quite a difference to the account at the end of the month,
apart from knowing exactly what had been bought so that I could
question wastage.
  "Peter, you can't possibly be out of cotter-pins already! I
bought two dozen on Monday."
  "I know. But I haven't got any left."
  "Well, I sincerely hope you're not using my cotter-pins on
another job. I can't think what else could have happened to
them. Try to remember now. What could you have used them on?"
  "I reckon I left them up on the Turramurra job."
  I sighed and he looked suitably chastened. "Well. Never mind.
Let's forget it now, but I think you should keep bits and
pieces like that in separate jars, and label them Lot 101 or
something, when you're working on so many different jobs."
  Next day I noticed, he had several small jam jars. They were
labelled, "Patsy".
  Not that Peter was the only one who seemed to have problems
with the right equipment. Frequently, the men didn't know where their tools were, or indeed, if they even owned whatever itwas they were looking for! 

