By Peter Bowler  

  Christian, n. One who follows the teachings of Christ in so far as they
  are not inconsistent with a life of sin.
                                        Ambrose Bierce  

Such notable clergymen as the Reverend Laurence Sterne and Father John of
Inverkeithing would have heartily endorsed Bierce's sentiments. And they
are but the vanguard of the host of rebel priests and clergy who come tumbling
out of the following pages - the eccentric, the unruly, the wayward, the
bawdy, the roguish, the downright criminal. Lovable characters, some of
them. Others `mad, bad and dangerous to know'. None of them fitting the
mould of the decent respectable man of the cloth that we know today.
  The brutal popes of the dark ages, the worldly popes of the Renaissance,
the rough-and-tumble debauchery of the English clergy in Elizabethan times,
the eighteenth-century country parsons whose behaviour verged on the lunatic,
the up-to-date rascality of the twentieth-century cult leaders ... it hardly
fits the accepted picture of the sober, righteous man of God, walking demurely
in the way of the Lord.
  Here is the human side of religion; the imp of the perverse, thumbing
its nose at solemnity and rectitude from its seat within their very portals.
What can have induced these professional purveyors of virtue to dabble in
the competing product? Can it be that they were not ... True Believers?

The Scandal of the Priests of Khnum
The dubious distinction of being perhaps the earliest criminal priest
on record goes to Penanouqi, the leader of the priests of Khnum at a temple
not far from the present site of Aswan, in twelfth century BC Egypt. The
details come from a judicial record from the reign of Rameses V (1165-1150
BC).
  The god Khnum, otherwise known as the Great Ram of the Cataract, was believed
to be the guardian of the huge underground reservoirs from which the
floodwaters of the Nile were supposed to gush forth at the right time each
year. The particular temple of Khnum at which Penanouqi served was located
on an island in the Nile, and at the time local trade was undergoing a
downturn. However, the temple of Khnum possessed riches derived over the
years from the gifts of pharaohs and the offerings of passing merchants.
  Penanouqi decided to profit from these riches. Acquiring a band of followers
from among the temple priests and the local boatmen, partly by bribery and
partly by threats of violence, he first of all took the sacred animals from
the temple and sold them for a good price to some other priests and some
army officers in the neighbourhood.
  Flushed with success, he seduced two married women, and then proceeded
to appropriate for his own ends more of the temple's riches - a valuable
amulet, and a precious casket, together with its contents. To ensure loyalty
among his followers, he singled out a few malcontents and had their ears
cut off and their eyes gouged out. Then, just to keep himself in practice,
he stole twenty sacrificial oxen and set a number of buildings on fire.
  His priestly followers, not wanting Penanouqi to have all the fun, seized
a treasure belonging to the goddess Anouqis, and propitiated with a percentage
of the takings a temple scribe who was starting to protest at the goings
on.
  Alas, at this point the judicial record breaks off. We know that Penanouqi
was caught, but not what happened to him.

 Some Interesting Popes  

John XII: His life was such that during his papacy the Lateran was spoken
of as a brothel. Died of a stroke while in the act of adultery.

John X: Strangled in the bed of his mistress, Theodora, the wife of the
Senator Theophylactus.

John XI: Illegitimate son of Pope Sergius III. Noted for his drunkenness
and debauchery.

Stephen VII: Illegitimate son of a priest. Stephen had the body of his
predecessor exhumed, displayed before a Roman synod, deprived of two of
its fingers, and thrown into the Tiber. Shortly after this, Stephen was
strangled.

Sergius III: Said to have put his two predecessors to death.

Benedict IX: Described by the Catholic Encylopedia as `a disgrace to the
Chair of Peter'. Led a dissolute life, and actually sold the office of Pope
so that he could afford to marry.

Alexander VI: Bought the papacy. In his younger days had been infamous for
`misconduct in Sienna which had been so notorious as to shock the whole
town and court', and he `continued as Pope the manner of life that had
disgraced his cardinalate' (Catholic Encyclopedia). Bestowed many favours
on members of his own family, most notably his children Caezar and Lucrezia
Borgia. Several of his enemies were mysteriously murdered. Said to have
died as a result of drinking by mistake a cup of poisoned wine that he had
prepared for another.

John VIII: Murdered by the priest Gregorius, who offered him a cup of warm
wine, laced with arsenic, on a cold evening. When the arsenic was slow to
take effect, Gregorius smashed the Pope's skull with a hammer.

Sylvester II: Known as the `magician pope' because of his interest in Moslem
science which was then more advanced than Christian science, and because
of the legend of his pact with the devil. Sylvester was poisoned. It is
possible that his poisoner was the widow of the rebel Crescentius, whose
beheaded body had been hung at Castel Sant' Angelo by the Emperor Otto III
and whose widow had already poisoned Otto in revenge. (The best known legend
of Sylvester was that he bargained with the devil to obtain the papacy,
on the understanding that he would die if he ever said Mass at Jerusalem.
One day he was saying Mass in a particular chapel at the Vatican when he
discovered that the chapel was named Jerusalem. End of Sylvester.)

 The Clergy in Sixteenth-Century England  

In 1559, Queen Elizabeth I was obliged to issue a decree `that the clergy
shall not haunt ale-houses or taverns, or spend their time idly at dice, 
cards, tables, or any other unlawful game'.
  In 1571, the House of Commons, in addressing the Queen, said that `great
numbers are admitted ministers that are infamous in their lives and
conversation'. In the same year, Bishop Grindal was obliged to give an order
that no unmarried clergyman `should keep any woman in his house under sixty
years of age, excepting she was his mother, aunt, sister or niece'.
  In 1579, according to Neal, `in the county of Cornwall, there were a
hundred and forty clergymen, not one of which was capable of preaching a
sermon'.
  In 1584, a group of citizens in Essex presented a petition to the council
in which they complained that the clergy were `the basest of all sorts
... rioters, dicers, drunkards and of offensive lives'. In the same year,
the Lords of the Council addressed a letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury
in which they said that a great number of curates were `notoriously unfit;
most for lack of learning - many chargeable with great and enormous faults,
as drunkenness, filthiness of life, gaming at cards, haunting of ale-houses'.

 Cardinal del Monte Has a Night Out  

In an avviso published in Rome in 1560, the following news item appears.
  
   His Holiness last Monday, about noon, sent for Cardinal del Monte to
   come to the Palazzo. It seems that he has been roaming the streets at
   night like a vagabond and getting into fights with people. On Friday
   night he not only got into a fight with a gang of boys but later on,
   in the house of the courtesan Martuccia, he had a fight with Signor Giacomo
   Malatesta, who pretended not to know who he was and beat him with a stick,
   and also beat the courtesan. Cardinal del Monte was fined three abbeys.

And Him a Man of the Cloth!

The modern image of a clergyman - more especially, perhaps, an Anglican
clergyman - is of a quiet, dignified, often diffident, always law-abiding
citizen.
  But the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in England, when curacies
and bishoprics were sold, bartered and inherited as often as earned, saw
some remarkable exceptions to the rule. Men such as:

Dr Lancelot Blackburne, Archbishop of York, who had formerly been a buccaneer
and who was said to have maintained a seraglio while in office. A later
Bishop of Norwich was believed to be his illegitimate son.

The Bishop of Raphoe, a part-time highwayman, who was shot on Hounslow Heath
one night while practising his part-time profession.

Dr Dodd, who was hanged for forgery.

Rev. James Hackman, who was hanged for shooting Lord Sandwich's mistress.

Rev. Thomas Hunter, who was hanged for murdering his pupils.

The Bishop of Ely, who was a notorious purloiner of other people's books.
Himself a distinguished collector of incunabula, he found it hard to resist
the temptation to add to his collection by whatever method presented itself.
Jackson recounts the story of a gentleman who, calling on a friend, found
him busily hiding his best books, and upon asking the reason, was given
the answer: `Don't you know, the Bishop of Ely dines with me today.'
  The Bishop of Ely's weakness affected many other men of the cloth, and
not only in England.

Giambattista Pamfili, before he became Pope Innocent X and the subject of
a famous Velasquez portrait, had a reputation similar to that of the Bishop
of Ely. There is a story of his attending upon Cardinal Barberini when the
latter went to visit the unique library of Montier. The future Pope slipped
a small but rare volume into his pocket, but when Montier noticed its absence
before the party left, Barberini ordered that the doors be closed and that
all present be searched. In the ensuing scuffle, the book fell out of Pamfili's
pocket. It is said that this incident was the cause of Innocent X's subsequent
persecution of the Barberini family. Mind you, the Bishop of Ely and Pope
Innocent X were babes in the wood compared with Cardinals Richelieu and
Mazarin, who carried off whole libraries from the towns and estates whose
power they had broken, and, above all, as compared with Don Vincente, a
monk of the Convent of Pobla, in Aragon, who murdered several book collectors
and students in order to obtain their most precious books.
  Some of the early British clergy, whilst not quite as reprehensible as
the highwaymen, rakes and cut-throats mentioned above, were nonetheless
unusual by modern standards. For example:

Bishop Crichton of Dunkald, who was also Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal to
James V, was described in Keith's Catalogue as `a man nobly disposed, very
hospitable, and a magnificent housekeeper, but in matters of religion not
much skilled'. Spottiswood, in his History of Scotland, reports Bishop Crichton
as having `said to one of his vicars that he thanked God he knew neither
the Old nor the New Testament, and yet had prospered well enough all his
dayes'.

 Benefit of Clergy  

In twelfth-century Britain, the church's struggle to exempt itself as far
as possible from the civil jurisdiction led to the introduction of the
so-called `benefit of clergy'. A `clerk' (i.e. a member of the clergy) could
claim benefit of clergy if charged with an offence, and this meant that
he could not be tried by the secular courts but would be tried instead by
the ecclesiastical authorities. 
  In practice, benefit of clergy soon became a good way for wrongdoers to
evade punishment. In the first place, the term `clerk' came to be defined
as meaning anyone who could read. In the second place, the ecclesiastical
authorities very rarely exacted any serious punishment upon offenders. For
many years, even murder was an offence for which benefit of clergy would
be claimed. William of Newberry reported that literally hundreds of murderers
got off scot-free in this fashion.
  There were some limits to benefit of clergy, however. People who were
defined as `clerks' merely because they could read, but were not ordained
priests, could only claim the benefit for a first offence. 

