By Sandy Thorne  

Battler had been stuck under the Dodge's bonnet for over half
an hour and, like a bloke exercising trotters in a gig, he was
getting sick of the view.
  His head throbbed where he'd hit it and was stinging where the
chook had clawed his temple; his knuckles were barked from
wrenching around in the engine in a bad temper. He was so
hungry he could have eaten the backside out of a rag doll; he
was out of smokes and to top it all off, his old man was still
having a shot at him. He'd never had such a good time!
  Mackenzie, after sending off the women, then helped change the
staked wheel and had been treated to a fine sample of the old
chap's sarcasm. "No, no - I'11 be right lad. Dulcie the wonder
dog will fix it or is she helping him with his truck?"
  The battler's friend was tempted to reply, "No, she's gone with
the women to make some sandwiches," but held the joke back
until the old man had cooled off a bit. Like an old stockhorse,
he was on his toes, spoiling for a chance to blow some steam,
and his son was on guard, equally ready to leap into a rip-
roaring barney if one got going. For once, Hamish sensed that
diplomacy was required more than wit to defuse the situation.
  Battler had been in strife with his father for as long as he
could remember, although, if anyone could ever make the old man
admit it, he was the favourite. He had the energy and tenacity
that the others lacked to enable them to be achievers in their
own right. The other boys lived the lives of a successful
grazier's sons, content to live under their father's financial
protection on the family property and becoming part of an
established estate and accepted it all as their birthright and
the natural order of things. Battler was his only offspring
with the inclination and the guts to make it on his own.
  As a little boy he had spent hours running around the burrs in
the horse paddock, after cunning ponies that tried every trick
in the book to evade capture. After finally cornering them, he
would repeatedly pick himself up out of the dust and the burrs
and climb back on every time they sent him into orbit. Battler
had always kept trying long after the others had given up.
  When the bank had forced him to walk off his first property
during the worst wool recession in history, he would not
succumb to misfortune and adversity. While his partner and twin
brother Norman had given up trying to make it on his own and
sworn never again to have anything to do with sheep
("groundlice" as he scathingly called them), "as long as his
arse pointed south," Battler took his sheep onto the stockroutes 
for three hard years, and never lost faith in the return
of the wool market.
  Norman had gone on to manage a cattle property, declaring that
his brother had "shit for brains". "Haven't you learnt your
lesson yet?" he'd sneered. "Anyone with half a brain'll tell
you there's only one thing sillier than a sheep these days, and
that's the bloke who has anything to do with 'em. Cattle are
the future now."
  "No, they're the good thing at the moment and that's all,"
countered the sheepman. "They'll drop just like they always
have, and then everyone who's sold all their sheep'll be
whingeing and wanting a bloody government subsidy to get them
out of strife. With sheep you've got two ways out - you can wear
'em or eat 'em. All you can do with cattle is eat the bastards.
There's only a few molls, poofters 'n weirdos who wear leather
pants. Wool will come back, when people realise synthetics
aren't as good."
  His stubborn faith in the future of wool-growing had kept him
going during all the hard times on the stockroutes - in all the
cold and rainy or hot and dusty seasons, sleeping in a swag,
seeing his wife and children deprived of the roof over their
head they could have had if he had gone to work in town or back
to his father's property "Longshot", at Gulargambone.
  But while his father admired these qualities and, in turn,
Battler had enormous respect for him, it was this tenacious
streak which caused the inevitable friction and barneys
between them whenever they were within cooee of each other,
because the old man was equally as stubborn. He and Mackenzie
walked back to see how Battler was progressing under the old
Dodge's bonnet. Mackenzie judged it was time for a joke. "We're
from the NRMA, sir. Do you require some assistance?"
  "Yeah. Grab that can of petrol, pour it over the bastard, and
chuck a match on it, will you, then wring that flamin'
rooster's neck and turf him on the fire. He's driving me round
the twist and I'm bloody starving."
  "You must need a good drench, boy. It can't be lunch time yet."
  Although he was wearing a watch, Battler didn't volunteer the
time to his father, because he knew there would be hell to pay
once he realised he was going to miss his favourite serial Blue
Hills. Unfortunately, Mackenzie was too far away to catch his
wink or a kick in the shins and piped up, "Well, it's ten past
one."
  The old man's bushy grey eyebrows almost met in the middle as
his face exploded in shock and fury. "What! Ten past one! For
God's sake, we're going to miss Blue Hills! Where's a flamin'
wireless? Got one in your car Mackenzie? Well, leave that
bloody wreck. Let's get up to the house, quickly!" As he
scurried to his truck, Battler stopped him short. "Forget it
Dad! By the time you get there, it'll be finished."
  "Stone the flamin' crows! Now I'11 have to wait 'til Monday to
find out whether they're going to put in the dam or not, and
whether Jack'll be silly enough to go through with marrying
that bitch Fleur! Hell, wouldn't this rot your bloody socks!"
  "Don't get your bowels in a twist, Dad. Even Jack wouldn't be
stupid enough to marry her. He'll have come to his senses by
Monday and called it off. Granny'll sort the drongo out - she
knows Fleur's just a tart after his property. She'll talk to
him."
  "Look, Granny's so worried about that dam flooding their
valley, she might shut up for a bit of peace and quiet!"
  Mackenzie was restraining himself from laughing
at the intensity of the conversation. It was hilarious to see
the straight, highly intelligent old bloke so concerned with
the characters of a soap opera. He couldn't resist a joke.
"Look, Pat, why don't I drive back into Black Stump later, ring
the ABC in Sydney and ask them to play it again over the
weekend?"
  Instead of laughing, the older man replied thoughtfully, "No,
no use. I've tried that before. The bludgers won't be in that,
and what's worse, when you ask them if they'll at least let you
know what happened, they won't even flaming well tell you. They
reckon they don't listen to it! Hah! They'd expect you to
believe anything. They think a man's a mug because he lives in
the bush."
  "Well, to tell you the truth, I wouldn't mind being in Kings
Cross or Bondi right now, instead of here," laughed Hamish, his
bushy ginger beard bobbing.
  "Yeah, well this just tops the day off, I s'pose," said the old
man thoughtfully.
  "The women will have listened to it on the car radio. They'll
let us know what happened Dad. I think this old girl is a tow
job up to the house. We can't leave it here with all these
flamin' animals on board. Bugger 'em - wish we'd left 'em back
at Longshot - flamin' squealing flamin' pigs, crapping chooks..."
  As he paused, glancing distastefully at the droppings streaked
down his shirt, the big dairy cow tethered up on the back of
the Dodge let forth a stream not unlike Niagara Falls, the
radius of the spray easily encompassing the bushman leaning
against the truck.
  "And piddling cows!" said Hamish, slapping his thigh as he
laughed at the expression on Battler's face. The brindle milker
stared apologetically at her new owner as she slowly lowered
her tail. He finally had to laugh, too, as he wiped the drops
off the back of his neck, wincing when he rubbed the deep
scratch from his earlier run-in with the chooks. "Well, that
must be it! What else could happen to a bloke in one day!"
  "Things could be worse mate. That could have been an elephant
up on the truck then. You might have drowned! I'm buggered if
I'd give you mouth-to-mouth."
  "Me either!" Paddy O'Brien agreed.
  "Well, at least I've had my shower for the day - save a bit of
water up at the house," Battler grinned.
  In the homestead kitchen, Deidre O'Brien had cleared out the
ash-box of the huge old cast-iron range, built a fire with wood
gathered by the children, and put the billy on. With sheets of
newspapers spread over the big wooden table, Dawn Mackenzie was
making up sandwiches out of the food they had brought in
Eskies. The children were running riot, taking their
grandmother on a grand tour of the rambling homestead. They
ran ahead of her along the long wooden verandahs of each wing,
running into all the rooms and through the French doors onto
the opposite side verandah, calling, "Look in here, Grandma!"
then racing down it and suddenly appearing behind her,
yelling, "Here we are, Grandma!"
  They savoured the delicious game in between arguing over who
would have each bedroom. The woman alternately laughed with
them and dabbed at moistened eyes. At last her grandchildren
had a home. Two of them, five-year-old Paddy and three-year-
old Richard, had only known camping on the back of an old
truck, while to the older two, twins Brendan and Belle, a house
and furniture was only a vague memory.
  The "long paddock", as bushmen call the stockroute, had been
their home, their entire world revolving around chasing enough
feed to keep the sheep alive. Like a lot of country women, Ada
O'Brien thought her son was perfect and hadn't given her town-bred
daughter-in-law credit for having the guts and fortitude
necessary to stick out life as a drover's wife. But the softly-
spoken girl from Dubbo had proved her wrong, and had made the
best of a bad situation for three long years, camping out in
all weathers, washing by hand, sewing every item of clothing
they all wore by hand, making decent meals out of next to
nothing over an open fire, teaching correspondence school and
the Bible to the children and being her husband's friend and
helpmate. Deidre O'Brien was Superwoman, one of the unsung
heroines of the outback, although she would have laughed off
the title. She had married a larrikin from the bush, a rodeo-
rider, and she had married him for better or for worse.
  Like most country women, Ada O'Brien found her husband's and
son's chauvinistic attitudes not only acceptable, but normal.
Just as she had rushed about dressing herself and six children
to go to town while her husband always sat in the car blowing
the horn to hurry her up, she found it quite normal whenever
she visited her son out on the stockroute for him to relax and
yarn with his father, while Dee, pregnant or not, bustled about
doing all the chores around the camp.
  "She's got her work cut out for her getting this place back
into shape and keeping it that way," she mused, never
considering that the seven-month pregnant woman should get a
helping hand from her man. The vast homestead had been built during the 1870s when there had always been plenty of staff to clean it and keep the garden in order. 

