<subsample>
	<id> R14c </id>
	


	<h> Down To Earth </h>
	

  Douglas, a young chap in his mid thirties, enjoyed the odd ale. As times
moved on, the breathalyser began operations in our home town, Lavington.
This, of course, put quite a scare into a large number of the locals; as
it did in many other towns.

  Douglas, like the rest of us, worked on his own ideas how to beat this
latest invention.

  As he lived approximately three kilometres from the `local' he decided
- too far to walk; too costly to hire a taxi, and he did like a yarn with
the boys. So Douglas bought a shining two wheel push bike.

  To give you an idea on Douglas' build, he was about 5'6&quot; in height and
weighed roughly fifteen stone.

  The very same afternoon that he purchased his bike, he set off, whistling
away, down to the Boomerang, where he joined the boys for a yarn and a
few ales.

  A couple of hours soon ticked away. Douglas decided to peddle off home.
He bought six bottles of Carlton Draught; these were handed to him in a
half size beer box. Although the bottles are loose, they fit quite neatly
into this box.

  Douglas strapped the box onto the carryall above the back mudgard, mounted
his machine, crossed the road and then took off for home, riding along
the edge of the bitumen. He had ridden about one kilometre up the road
when he started to run out of puff. At the same time he heard a commotion
behind him and looked around to find a semi trailer appearing to be cutting
him very short on roadway.

  Douglas steered sharply towards the gutter, hit a pot-hole and of course
lost control. After all the wobbling and crashing came to an end, the bottles
had skidded onto the highway and Douglas was on the footpath with the bike
perched on top of him. He jumped up, elbows and knees skinned and bleeding,
the semi was disappearing around a corner, some cars were running over
a few bottles, while others were swerving to dodge the remainder.

  When the traffic eased down Douglas sauntered over the roadway and gathered
his six bottles. Quite amazingly none of these were broken.


</subsample>
