By Phyllis Shatte A Family Split  

"Is there a doctor present?" Elinor asked anxiously, as she held Susan to
her.
  "I'm a doctor," a quietly spoken young man stepped out of the crowd. He bent
over Susan and felt her pulse. "I'll get my bag from the car," he said.
  He instructed the crowd to step back, and proceeded to examine Susan
thoroughly. "She's had a complete nervous breakdown," he informed the
family, as he introduced himself as Dr. Cornell. "She'll have to go to
hospital for treatment. How many children has she got?"
  "Five!" Elinor replied. "The youngest, a baby girl, is only nine months
old."
  "Is she still breast fed?"
  "She is practically weaned," Elinor advised. "She will survive on the
bottle."
  "Can the children be placed with somebody?" Dr. Cornell asked. James was
hovering around, anxious to help.
  "They can accompany me to my parents' place," he told Dr. Cornell.
  "I'll take the baby," Elinor ignored James. "We can stay with my sister,
Greta in Stanthorpe, till Susan recovers. I think Rob and Samuel can go to
their grandparents at Rockvale, and Pam would probably prefer to go to her
grandparents at Cottonvale."
  Pam was crying. She had not forgotten the previous fire in which Mandy had
perished. She was very upset.
  "I'd like to go to Irma's place, and go with her to school at Dalveen!."
  "I'd forgotten about school for Pam," Elinor apologised. "She goes with her
brothers to Thulimbah School. If that is all right with her father, she can
go to Dalveen!"
  "Yes. Pam likes to be with Irma. I'll go down and see if I can help dad out.
The cottage is empty." James gave his consent willingly.
  The crowd was beginning to disperse. Emily, Fred and family were too upset
to speak. They were going to miss Susan and the children. They had grown to
love Susan as their own daughter.
  "We'll be in town to visit her," Emily told Elinor, and Elinor wrote down
Greta's address for them.
  Susan was still unconscious. She looked so small and frail. How could this
happen to her again? She was such a wonderful, hard-working person. Somebody
was out to drive them away from Cottonvale. Elinor had a feeling that this
time they had succeeded.
  "I'll take her to Stanthorpe," Dr. Cornell said. "My wife is with me. Susan
needs treatment immediately."
  "I'll come with you," James offered.
  "There's nothing to be gained by that," Dr. Cornell, who had overheard
Susan's bitter outburst, informed him firmly. "She needs complete rest.
Nobody gets in to see her for several days. We've got a lot of work to do
to get her back on her feet. The shock has been horrific!"
  James assisted Dr. Cornell to carry Susan to his car. They placed her on the
back seat, and tucked a blanket around her.
  The children were upset, but they did not play up.
  James put Pam in his car, and wished his other children goodbye. "I'll be
in touch," he assured Samuel.
  "We'll take the boys and Deanna to Rockvale now, and take Deanna into
Stanthorpe tomorrow. Susan is sure to ask for her first," Elinor gave Dr.
Cornell Greta's address. She lived only a street away from the hospital.
  Elinor had collected the big nappy bag Susan had carried with her. It also
contained the takings over the past few days, and Elinor kept quiet about
that. She knew Susan would not want James to know she had salvaged the
money. As she was about to step into the car, having settled the tired boys
on the back seat, a black hand reached out to her.
  "Take this," kindly old George Sorlie said. "It's the night's takings. It
might help to buy a few clothes for the children. It's times like this I
wish I were a real magician. I'd put the house and shop back where they
were, and make this small amount of money into thousands of pounds.
Unfortunately, I'm not really as brilliant as I'd like to be!"
  Elinor burst into tears. "That's wonderful of you," she said, "Susan will
be forever grateful."
  "I wish I could do more. I hope our paths cross again one day. I'm an
excellent judge of character, and I have a feeling that little lady is in 
for a tough time, but she is a battler. She will win through. That I can 
predict!"
  "If she doesn't, it won't be for the want of trying," Elinor shook his hand
firmly. "God be with you," she said as she got into the car. John handed
Deanna to her, and they waved goodbye to the Smiths and other folk they
knew, and drove slowly away.
  Albert and Sue Chapman heard the car approaching about one o'clock in the
morning, and expected the worst. They never had visitors at that hour of the
morning, unless something was wrong.
  John explained what had happened. The children were too tired to talk.
"They've got what they stand up in," Elinor explained. "They lost
everything, and James had not paid the insurance premium."
  "Where's Susan?" her mother asked.
  "She's in hospital," Elinor replied. "Dr. Cornell drove her. She's had a
complete nervous breakdown, and we had to place the children. Pam is going
to Dalveen. John and I are taking Deanna to Stanthorpe. We'll stay with
Greta and Ted. We've brought the boys here to you. If you can't look after
them, we'll place the boys with Arthur or Victor."
  "No! They are welcome to stay with us. We have them during the school
holidays. We'll manage. There are a few clothes here for them. Susan always
leaves a few things behind on purpose. It saves packing a stack of clothes
every time they come to stay. It's incredible!" Sue Chapman continued. "You
wouldn't believe that fire could happen three times to the one family!"
  "This time they lost everything. Susan gave James the insurance money to pay
the account, and he didn't do it!"
  "That's typical of James," her mother answered. "Then you and John must have
lost all your wedding presents too."
  "All the breakable gifts," Elinor replied. "The rest are packed in with our
furniture, and on the way to Rockhampton with some of our clothes. We've
lost a lot of our own personal belongings, but at least we have a few
things."
  "What about your honeymoon?" her mother asked.
  "It can wait," Elinor answered. "John and I will stay with Greta and Ted for
a while, and take care of Deanna, unless Susan is in hospital for some time.
Then we'll work something out."
  They were soon in bed, but Elinor and John could not sleep. They were
thinking of Susan, and the family split up because of another tragedy that
was no fault of their own. They were sure it had been deliberate!
  Despite the late night, they were all up early next morning. The boys were
upset over the loss of clothes, toys and school books. However, Sue Chapman 
had most of the books from her own children, and she gave them to Samuel and 
Rob.
  "Did you lose your trike, Max?" she asked unhappily, knowing how much Max
valued his trike.
  "No! It's with Mrs. Smith. I left it in their picnic area when I was called
home to get ready last night. She will look after it for me!"
  "I think Susan's sewing machine was at Smiths too. Emily borrowed it a week
ago, so Susan has it and a lot of things stored in the shed. Other than
that, they lost everything."
  Fortunately it was the weekend, so Sue Chapman was able to get herself
organised. Elinor handed her the money the entertainer had presented to
them. "This will help to buy clothes for the children. At least they can
start school on Monday with new clothes. It will mean a trip into town
today. If you and dad take the utility, we can go in our car and stay with
Greta and keep Deanna with us. Then you can bring the boys back. "
  "Can we see mum?" Samuel asked, when they were told they were going to town.
  "If you are allowed in," Elinor promised. "We'll certainly try to see her."
  The latest disaster had left them feeling very quiet and detached, but they
were excited over the trip to town. Elinor went shopping with her mother,
and they bought clothes for the children, including Pam and Deanna. Elinor
still had the money from the shop takings, but she didn't want to touch that
until she had a chance to discuss with Susan what accounts were outstanding,
in case she required the money to settle any debts.
  They had lunch with Greta and Ted, who advised they would gladly put Elinor,
John and Deanna up. Greta advised if they wished to proceed with their trip
to Rockhampton, they would be pleased to look after Deanna.
  They had no children of their own, and Greta dearly loved babies.
  So there would not be too many visitors for Susan to cope with, Elinor took
the three boys and Deanna with her to hospital. They were lucky to strike
Dr. Cornell, who told Elinor she could go in for a few minutes with Deanna,
but the boys had to wait at the door.
  "She's been asking for Deanna and Max," Dr. Cornell reported.
  Elinor was upset when she saw Susan's face. This latest tragedy had left its
mark.
  "I'll never forgive James for not paying the insurance," Susan said. That
seemed to hurt her more than the fire. "He didn't even hand the money back!
I suppose he spent that on his girl friend as well!"
  "Girl friend?" Elinor was shocked.
  "Yes. He's been two-timing me for some time, and using our money to purchase
expensive gifts. I had our joint account changed into separate accounts. At
least he can't touch what I have in my bank account, so we are not entirely
destitute!"
  "Poor Susan!" Elinor said in disbelief. "I didn't know anything about that! 
I'm really sorry. No wonder you had a nervous breakdown. You have more
than your share of problems!"
  "Bring the boys in," Susan said to Elinor. "I want to see them."
  "The doctor said they were not to come in," but when Samuel heard his mother
say to bring the boys in, they came, and stood meekly beside her bed.
  "We'll be all right mum," Samuel assured her. "You just get better. We want
you back home with us."
  They didn't have a home any more, Susan was thinking, but she brightened up
considerably. "Where's Pam?"
  "She is going over to Irma's place, and James has gone to his parents. We
are staying with Greta and Ted, and minding Deanna," Elinor explained.
  "I think you and John should get on with your honeymoon, and leave Deanna
with Greta. You've suffered enough and lost some of your wedding gifts and
personal belongings. The doctor said I'll be here for at least a couple of
months."
  "We'll talk it over with Greta," Elinor said as she kissed her sister
warmly. "Don't you worry."
  The boys kissed their mother goodbye, and Max gave her a special hug. "I'll
keep away from the creek," he promised her, and Susan felt relieved. She
knew when Max made a promise he would keep it!
  Susan made up her mind to co-operate and do all she could to get better. She
wanted to be back with her children.
  Elinor and John talked things over with Greta and Ted, and decided it would
be sensible to continue on their honeymoon to Rockhampton, and start in
their new business. Greta and Ted loved children, and Deanna was settling
down well with them, without her mother.
  They called at the hospital and said goodbye to Susan, promising to keep in
touch. Susan wished them well, and hoped they would never suffer loss of
their living by fire.

