<sample>
	<id> S07 </id>
	


	<note> 2010 words </note>
	


	<source> Widdershins </source>
	


	<bl> By Jack Beasley </bl>
	

THE MASTER of Apprentices at the steel works was an avuncular retainer who
hibernated, all year round, in a grimy little wooden shack built as a kind
of afterthought just through the main entrance.  On the wall of his office
was a framed Elbert Hubbard homily, If You Work For A Man, For Heaven's
Sake Be Loyal To Him, blasphemously known to the apprentices as the bumsuckers'
oath.  He probably*propably didn't know it was there nor was he for long
after breaking a leg, later amputated, when he jumped over the back fence
of a hotel to escape an after hours police raid.  His replacement was very
BHP, a soldierly gentleman named Mr Piper who cleaned the office up, placed
the bumsuckers' oath in a more accusing position and began supervising our
health, morals and craft training.  Within limits, that is.  I was never
cited before him, but I did go to him more than once with problems and
complaints of my own and of others, and always found him polite and reasonable.
    The real master of the apprentices, the man to whom we were bound, body
and soul, for five interminable years, was a remote, austere grey figure
whose signature on my indenture was a simple L. Grant.  Leonard Grant was
a BHP product made flesh, the model steel industry oligarch, yet I'm sure
his neighbours on the heights overlooking Merewether Beach, the right side
of the tracks, would have found this difficult to believe.  We lived not
a great distance apart, across that socially insurmountable coal line, so
it wasn't surprising that I'd sometimes encounter him on my lonely Sunday
afternoon ramblings through the ragged scrub along the hills sloping down
to the Pacific.  He walked with the steel works efficiency expert, for,
like policemen, the top management seemed to feel more secure in each other's
company.  He was achromatic still on Sundays, the week day grey suit exchanged
for trousers and cap with a grey bow tie sitting primly at his collar, but
I fancy he wore his usual black shoes.  Bent slightly forward from his trim
waist, hands clasped behind, face revealing not a thing as he listened to
his voluble companion, Grant moved through the bush as inconspicuously as
some of the bush creatures themselves.  Even the invisible whip birds, about
the last of the native songsters, maintained their long shrill note and
cracking finale, undisturbed by his passing.  He didn't exactly select each
place to put a foot but appeared to, progressing quietly and evenly.
    If he ever recognised me he gave no sign of having done so, not even
the non-committal Australian g'day, but on the last occasion we chanced
together, I'm sure he did.  That was quite a few years on, just after the
Coal Strike, and I was on a party assignment travelling by the late afternoon
express carrying business people back north from Sydney.  Grant was travelling
too, as always without ostentation, sitting across the aisle from me.  Towards
Newcastle an apologetic untidy figure of a man claimed him, a union official
recently installed by the Arbitration Court in the anti-communist shake-up,
words tumbling incoherently about something he couldn't handle and how sorry
he was to have to bother you.  Perhaps my former master recognised me, perhaps
he didn't.  Perhaps my eyes revealed that I was listening too intently,
for he quietly cut through the gabble of his supplicant, `Don't talk about
it now, I'll contact you, we have to protect your position,' thus dismissing
him, still clutching his forelock.  Leonard Grant resumed his newspaper,
with not the slightest impression showing on the mask he turned to the world.
    Always listening, giving away nothing, the unchanging features inevitably
earned him the ironic nick-name he would carry through his life, right up
to the general managership of BHP.  He stood unobtrusively in the background
when accompanying the more flamboyant Essington Lewis on plant inspections,
but the department managers and supers knew that it was Smiler Grant who
observed, who noted, who acted.
    Getting to be a steel works apprentice wasn't all that easy even with
a certificate from a junior technical school and only came about for a lot
of us because by 1936 there was a slight easing of the tough times.  Not
for everybody, some had missed the bus and would never catch up.  The new
steel works at Port Kembla, and expansion at Newcastle started the ball
rolling and a few workers began to get jobs in a buyer's market.  Before
sitting for BHP's own examination, no mere Education Department was going
to set their standards, and before going before their selection panel after
the exam, I'd applied for a counter jumper's job at the Co-op Store.  A
hundred or so young hopefuls lined up for the sole position advertised,
long odds in anybody's book, then presented myself as a possible delivery
boy for a cut price grocery chain.  I flunked that one too, for to get the
fifteen shillings per week you not only had to work about fifty hours but
make an investment in the firm by providing your own bicycle.  In the event,
this mightn't have been an altogether bad thing, for the local manager was
a gentleman who used to run an SP book on the side.  Inevitably, he tickled
the peter, spent time in one of His Majesty's prisons, to emerge wondrously
transformed from this pupation during the post Coal Strike turmoil as secretary
of the Ironworkers' Union, executive member of the Labor Party and an MLC.
Following which efforts he died, sooner than expected.
    Although two of my sisters were tailoresses, theirs was a hit or miss
arrangement, nothing legal, no indentures.  The only apprentice on either
side of the family, hitherto, was my uncle Dave Morgan, who had been a jockey.
It was a minor event round the place, Mum crowing over a niece whose son
hadn't made the grade, and the old man remarking, not to me, to her, that
I'd done pretty well, considering.  Getting my short back and sides, with
a smear of Spruso on top, at the barbers I also got much advice from the
man himself and even more from his roost of clients.  Your set for life now, 
young feller, a trade will always stick to you, a growing trade everything's 
electric now, a trademan's tools can't*cant be taken from him legally,
you'll always be able to make a living.  Then for a little time afterwards, I 
believed them and for most of the apprentices it was the truth.  For me though,
some continuing disturbance of which I was just then becoming aware seemed
to have me often out of step, or going the other way.  Something beneath
the surface, felt not seen, a dissonance in the back of my mind never quite
in tune which I couldn't get hold of, and couldn't get rid of.
    It was the only steel works in Australia and it was an intimidating
place for a fifteen year old in the middle of winter.  Miles out of town,
it was reached by bus or bike, through Hamilton and Islington, across Throsby
Creek, up through Tighes Hill and down the long slope past the general office,
where Les Jones had found a job of sorts, to the barbed wire beyond which
you reached your work bench on foot by seven thirty a.m.  You discovered
the home of the minotaur whose crashing thumps had been a menacing
accompaniment to your whole life, the mill where the giant blooms came,
red hot from reheating after gestation in the blast furnace and open hearth,
to be battered into a more manageable shape.  Searing heat, smoke, steam
and thunderous noise was the working environment of those who toiled and
moiled in this labyrinth, and you wondered that their bodies could withstand
such punishment.
    Five days a week you worked till four o'clock, showed up for another
four hours on Saturday and on three nights you went to technical college.
Quite often on Saturday morning you were handed a breakdown job and expected
to get a full days work done by the whistle which meant, in your first year,
getting a little less than two bob for your efforts.  The first two years
were hard, you were kept at it and you had to do a diversity of jobs, some
menial, in addition to learning your trade.  Jobs such as lunch boy, office
cleaner, messenger, store assistant, and billy boy.  This latter was an
incredible balancing feat with two of us on the ends of two notched poles,
like stretcher bearers, carrying forty or fifty billy cans all the way to
the direct current substation, (home also of the works whistle, heard all
over the town), and back again.  Any suggestion of putting an urn in the
workshop would have seemed like quixotic nonsense, or dangerous subversion,
to the management.  We were good cheap skilled labour and no two ways about
it, yet over the five years there was mostly no frantic pressure to do more
work, apart from the Saturday lurk noted above, just an insistence on doing
things properly which was probably cheaper in the long run.
    Work clothes had to be bought, and tools of trade, from the pittance
paid to us fortnightly.  There was a gala event, the quarterly `tech bonus',
which depended on your attendance and progress in your evening and week-end
studies.  For a long time I wore my one and only suit, bought in the last
school year, to work each day with overalls drawn on over the trousers in
the colder months, then brushed it up and polished the only shoes, a pair
of black sneakers, to go to the pictures on Saturday nights.  There was
no religion, as we understood it, in the works, for the god that was worshipped
there was of heavier metal.  We passed religion on the way to and from on
a large notice board outside a church which said, If You Watch The Clock
You Will Remain One Of The Hands.  So there they were, and there we were.
    Trade unionism was of the meekest and most subservient kind, only the
craft unions being organised until the war years when the unskilled workers
began to gain ground.  Every so often a decimation of the tradesmen was
carried out, to sharpen the morale of those remaining.  The method of this
was to notify the condemned at ten thirty on Saturday morning because, even
if their fate had been decided weeks before, only one hour's notice was
legally required.  This procedure prevented those being sacked from seeking
another job until they were right out on the street and epitomised Newcastle's
second system of industrial relations.  Always the word was passed around
that things were tough on `the outside', the menacing shadow world beyond
the barbed wire, while we inside were warm and cosy in the womb of the steel
octopus.
    Somewhere in all that smoke and grit and noise there was a ladder. 
We knew it was there because the man in the shiny blue suit had told us
so, though not in metaphor, at our induction.  The BHP Review regularly carried
photographs of former apprentices who had climbed up a few rungs of that
ladder during a lifetime of devotion to the company although it didn't say
much about the new breed of university graduates, untainted by any former
contact with the lower classes, who were moving into supervising positions.
This ladder was something like Napoleon's symbolic baton, or even the stairway
to the stars, except that a staircase offered an easy way up which would
be spurned by the stout-hearted BHP apprentices.
    Ron Laidler evidently climbed the wrong ladder when he was decapitated
under a rail mill crane and Jimmy Davis must have stepped off on the wrong
foot to be bisected by the blast furnace larry car.  Cec Frith would never
be much of a ladder climber again, after he lost a leg in the coke ovens.


</sample>
