<sample>
	<id> S17 </id>
	


	<note> 2007 words </note>
	


	<source> Quadrant - July/August 1986 </source>
	


	<h> The red back spider </h>
	


	<bl> By Peter Skrzynecki </bl>
	

	
	<h>1</h>
	
WHILE my father lived and worked in Sydney for the Water Board during our
first two years in Australia, my mother found occasional domestic employment
in town and on the farms around the migrant hostel where we lived in the
Central West of New South Wales.
  Of the jobs she held, one was what might be called &quot;regular&quot; - as a
washer-woman and ironing-and-cleaning lady on a sheep and wheat property,
five or six mile from the hostel. Occasionally, however, requests for an
extra day's, a week's or a month's work would reach my mother from the head
of the household, Mrs Hunter - a small, grey-haired widow who ran the property
with two sons and a daughter.
  In this case, a referral was made to a Mrs Burnett for gardening work
to be done in the township. The pay was a dollar - or, ten shillings, as
it was called then - a day.
	
	<h>2</h>
	
The house in Carp Street was a fibro cottage built on a sloping block
of land - the foundations at the back being high enough for a child to stand
under and an adult to crouch or sit down.
  Except for its weeds, the yard was almost bare, empty of bushes or trees.
A few geraniums straggled out of the caked earth down one side of the house,
under a window. The weeds were dried by the hot summer sun - yellow, brown,
white; they grew densely at the back and more sparsely towards the front
and down the sides of the house; patches of reddish-orange clay blended
in with them. This was the &quot;gardening&quot; my mother had been employed for -
her task being to clear the yard of weeds and stack them. Later, they all
had to be burnt.
  The lady of the house, Mrs Burnett, was also a widow - a bony woman whose
brown-as-leather skin hung over her frame like a synthetic material and
gave her an appearance of being fleshless. She spoke shrilly, bird-like,
peering over her glasses as if my mother and I were hard of hearing. Despite
her appearance, she did not seem to be very old. As she spoke, she pointed
with a crooked finger.
  &quot;The gardening implements are under the house. You may stack the weeds
over there, in the left corner. They must be burnt when they are dried out.
I shall pay you at the end of the day ... Thank you. Oh yes? The child may
stay with you providing he does not become a hindrance.&quot;
  With that she hurried away, but at the top of the steps she closed the
door slowly, deliberately, with a metallic &quot;click&quot;: as if to establish the
necessary barrier that must exist between mistress and servant.
		
  According to my mother the work would take two or three days, and these
she would slot in between the days she worked for Mrs Hunter. As it was
the period before Christmas, school at the hostel was finished and I was
allowed to accompany her. We would catch the bus from the camp to the centre
of town, then walk among the shops and houses with tidy rural gardens, past
the post office, police station and courthouse: skirt the hospital grounds
and walk around the hill with a War Memorial on top - its pale blue light
burning all night and into the early hours of morning. Carp Street lay at
the end of this circuit.
  On the first day, while my mother worked, I played in the dirt and among
the weeds - with two small rectangular blocks of wood that were imaginary
cars: making roads, bridges, tracks and roads. When the sun became too hot
I would go under the house, continuing my game there. My mother wore a
broad-rimmed straw hat and made me a cap by tying knots into the four ends
of a handkerchief. We drank water from a tap by the back steps and next
to an outside toilet. We had sandwiches for lunch under the house together
- in the cool, where we could hear Mrs Burnett walking around and the muffled
sound of conversation, as though she were speaking to someone.
  There were boxes and cases under the house, some nailed and some shut:
and when my mother returned to work after lunch, I found an open one. Inside,
to my surprise, were lead toys - animals of all kinds: sheep, cows, horses,
pigs. There were soldiers, too - standing at attention, firing rifles,
attacking, charging with bayonets. Magically, as if in a dream, they became
part of another dimension - a contrast to the world outside in the dirt
and weeds. At last I had some real toys!
  In the shade, under the floorboards, a new world of experience opened
up to me that afternoon: as I made an imaginary farm and invented a war
that my soldiers fought to the death to win. Talking to myself, giving orders
and calling to animals, I became totally immersed in my games. Then, at
one point, as I galloped a brown horse through a scattering of weeds, there
was a cry from my mother and I rushed over to the side fence where she was
kneeling.
  &quot;Zarazliwy!&quot; she cried.
  The word meant &quot;poisonous&quot; and I recoiled instantly. 
  Under a beam of the paling fence where the hoe could not reach, between
a small rusty tin and the ground, was a spider's web. Hung in its centre,
like a black pearl, was a red-back spider: glistening in the sun, the red
stripe on its back even more brilliant than the glossy-black some. Its front
legs were raised, slender and fine, like a dancer's.
  My mother held up a hand in caution. &quot;Uwazaj&quot;, she warned. &quot;Be careful.&quot;
  With a stick she started to extract the spider from its web - awkwardly,
because the web was sticky; but in the blink of an eye it scurried into
the tin, its slim legs becoming a blur of movement.
  Turning over the tin, my mother indicated the egg-sacs, four or five,
of yellow-brown silk. &quot;Inside are its eggs,&quot; she said. &quot;Hundreds of them.&quot;
  Peering over her shoulder I wondered why the spider had to hide its eggs
like that: in a rusty tin, under the fence among the weeds? What was wrong
with laying them out in the sunlight - where they could warm more easily?
Birds made their nests out in the open, in the trees; a butterfly spun its
chrysalis and left it on a branch. Was it because it was poisonous, or was
there something evil in its nature, that it had to hide?
  Without speaking, my mother prodded the inside of the tin with a stick.
  &quot;Did you kill it?&quot; I asked.
  &quot;I don't know; but we must make sure. It is a poisonous kind.&quot;
  She dropped dry weeds into the tin and pushed them in with a stick. Taking
a box of matches from the pocket of her apron she dropped a lit match into
the tin.
  A tongue of fire rose up; smoke curled in its wake - wispy, slowly becoming
thicker. Then all the grass in the tin seemed to catch on fire at once.
Smoke poured out.
  Where was the spider? I thought. Why doesn't it come running out.
  &quot;What is the matter?&quot;
  It was Mrs Burnett; she stood behind us, hands held out pontifically,
her myopic eyes straining in the sunlight, peering at us as if we had green
skin.
  &quot;Spider,&quot; my mother replied. &quot;Black - with red on back.&quot;
  &quot;Oh, I see ... Very well, you may continue.&quot;
  Turning around, I stepped back to look at her.
  &quot;What is that you have, boy - in your shirt pocket?&quot;
  It was the galloping brown horse I was playing with when my mother called
out. I must have put it into my pocket.
  My mother stood up, wiping the sweat from her eyes.
  &quot;He not take the horse ... He only put it in pocket.&quot;
  She took the horse and handed it to Mrs Burnett.
  &quot;You found the suitcase, I see. Please return all the toys and do not
play with them.&quot;
  She took the horse and clasped it in her hand like it was a precious stone;
then she returned to the house, up the unpainted steps and clicked the door
behind her like she did that morning.
  In the last few moments I had forgotten the spider; suddenly, I remembered.
&quot;The spider! The spider!&quot;
  At our feet the fire had gone out; smoke rose from the tin and its contents
were a small heap of ashed, barely distinguishable from the blackened interior.
  We both knelt down on the hot earth.
  &quot;There is no more spider,&quot; my mother said tersely. She tipped over the
tin and scattered its contents with her foot. Then she picked up the tin
on the end of the stick and carried it over to the garbage next to the toilet.
It fell in with a &quot;clunk&quot; and she dropped the lid with a clatter, as if
she did not care whether it made a noise or not.
  She began to talk about something different - something that had nothing
to do at all with the events of a few minutes earlier. But I could tell she
was upset, that she was only pretending - distracting herself so as not
to become upset. She was sad. I could tell that by the tone of her voice;
and although I could not bring myself to ask why, I knew it had nothing
to do with the spider.
		
  That night, as I lay in bed, I wondered about Mrs Burnett and her house.
There was something mysterious about them, a secret - the sort of puzzle
that one receives intimations about but nothing definite can be pinpointed,
nothing tangible. But the feeling remains. And nags.
  I had returned the toys; my mother was paid her ten shillings and we returned
to the hostel an hour before dinner was served in the mess hall. Nothing
more had been mentioned about the spider or the galloping horse. What was
it, then, that was bothering me? I tossed and tossed for a long time, unable
to sleep. Fretting. However, I could not dismiss the house or its owner
from my mind. It was as if another mind was sending me messages - trying
to make contact: calling out for help.
	
	<h>3</h>
	
The second day passed without incident; the toys had been removed from
under the house, presumably by Mrs Burnett, and I played with my own blocks
of wood - back among the tracks and roads, tunnels, bridges and weeds. I
half expected my mother to find another red-back spider and we would burn
it also; but no, nothing of the sort happened. Luckily, the weeding was
finished by the end of the day and all that remained was for the grass to
be raked into heaps, waiting until it was ready for burning.
  Mrs Burnett and my mother arranged for one more day's work, this to be
completed between Boxing Day and the New Year; any extra weeding that needed
doing could be done then and the present lot burned off. With the weather
being as hot as it was, the weeds should dry out quickly enough.
  And that night, again, the house and its owner began to trouble me - like
they were trying to draw me back: to seep into my brain and leave an
indecipherable message.
  This time I told my mother the house and its owner frightened me. She
was quiet, as if she had trouble finding the right words to answer me.
  &quot;It is because of the horse,&quot; she said. &quot;Try not to think about it. Do
other things - occupy yourself and it will go away ... When I return for
the last time, you need not come. If you want to stay behind, I will find
someone to mind you.&quot;       


</sample>
