<sample>
	<id> S22 </id>
	


	<note> 2000 words </note>
	


	<source> Westerly - September 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Gravity </h>
	


	<bl> By Gillian Higginson </bl>
	

I was thirteen years old in 1969. That year was the end of a decade, the
beginning of which I could not remember. Week after week - or so it appeared
to me - I watched television documentaries about the sixties, all with titles
like &quot;This Is The Decade That Was&quot;. I sat through them, silently, while
my parents exclaimed and sighed and shook their heads at the catalogue of
debacles and disasters which paraded across the screen. I seemed to be always
at home that year, watching television with my parents on Saturday nights.

  Weekends were interminable in the dozy Blue Mountains town where we lived.
My sister Louise, three years older than me, wasn't at home very often,
and her absences only increased my own sense of dreary captivity. Old rituals
that had once bound us as a family were disintegrating. Louise had scorned
Sunday drives long ago, and now I sullenly resisted them too. My mother
would stand in the doorway of my bedroom where I would be aimlessly be
arranging my hair with my sister's curling tongs or, perhaps, bending over
a bowl of hot water, steaming blackheads off my face, and she'd say to me
wearily,   

  &quot;Dad and I thought it would be nice to go for a drive out to the nursery
this afternoon. I don't suppose you're interested?&quot;

  I would make a face of disgust and shake my head; she'd survey me for
just a moment before going out to tell my father.
  
  &quot;Anne's not coming,&quot; she'd sigh.

  &quot;Anne's not coming,&quot; he'd repeat sardonically. &quot;Alright, we'll bloody
well go by ourselves then.&quot;

  And off they would go alone, most Sundays, my father tightlipped; my mother
sad and appeasing.

  After their car had disappeared out the end of our street I'd retrieve
the packet of Alpine cigarettes that I kept hidden under my mattress, lock
up the house and go out, usually, down to the shops (which my parents,
hankering after a different, more English way of life, referred to as &quot;the
village&quot;). I walked, head down, hoping not to meet the eyes of neighbours
out gardening. These streets, which until only recently had inspired, and
provided the stage for, all my games and fantasies, now yielded nothing
to my imagination. They were intolerably familiar. The shops when I reached
them - all shut up and silent and empty until Monday morning - depressed
me more than anything I could imagine. There was nobody about. I stood and
looked through the window of Mrs Betts, the grocer, and thought about heaving
a rock through it, just to hear the crash echo through the still streets.
No place on earth could be as deadly as the town I lived in.
  I sat at the empty bus stop and listened to the mournful, hypnotic drone
of model aeroplanes down on the oval, and to the far off sound of cars toiling
up and down the Great Western Highway, lucky city dwellers just out for
the day. Then, my energy low but with my heart beating quickly - racing
with nervy restlessness and desire, desire for something else, for somewhere
other than this place - I would go across the park to the public toilets
at the back of the School of Arts, to smoke a cigarette. Standing there
in the graffitied gloom, inhaling deeply, I would feel a little restored.
The cigarette, forbidden and frowned upon, made me feel less a part of this
town, less a part of my family, and somehow closer to my true, as yet
undiscovered and unexpressed, self. Those packets of Alpine represented
the unknown side of my life, my secret potential, my future. But once the
cigarette, occasionally followed by another, was over, there was nothing
left to do but drag myself home again, to be back in my room with the door
shut by the time my parents returned from the nursery or wherever they had
been. On Sunday nights I drifted from room to room, dissatisfied in all
of them, impatient for the weekend to be over.

  Every year in May my father would get the big electric heater out of the
hall cupboard and, grimly, install it in the open fireplace which during
the warmer months of the year was occupied by an elaborate dried flower
arrangement. The fireplace was a persistent sore point with my father. When
he had had our house built three years earlier he had requested an open
fireplace, a feature not included in the development company's plans. The
company had hummed and hawed and warned of additional expense and how there
wasn't much call for them these days, but my father remained firm. He had
always dreamed of an open fire, he said, and he was now going to have one.
So the fireplace and chimney was duly built and, a few weeks after we had
moved in my father, savouring the moment, declared,

  &quot;Well, there's a real nip in the air today, isn't there? I think we'll
have a fire tonight.&quot;

  When all the newspaper and kindling and logs had been neatly assembled
on the hearth we gathered around, my mother ready with the inevitable pot
of tea and a date loaf to mark the occasion. My father got methodically
to work with not too much paper and just the right amount of kindling, starting
a lovely blaze with just one match: it would have annoyed him if he had
been unable to do it with one. He sat back on his haunches, proundly, and
Louise and I cheered and clapped and my mother poured the tea. For just
a moment we all joined with my father in his dream come true. The sweet
smell of burning wood, the dancing golden flame and the glow of snug well-being
- it was suddenly what each one of us, too, had always longed for.
  But within minutes the lounge room was filling up with smoke. Something
wasn't working right. My disconcerted father bent down to the blaze and
poked and proded, but smoke continued to pour forth, into the room. The
chimney just didn't seem to be drawing at all.
  &quot;Maybe there's a bird's nest up there,&quot; my mother suggested soothingly.
  Louise and I looked at each other and quietly left the room. Our eyes
were starting to stream. We could hear my father's frustrated, angry curses
as we sat in the kitchen, silently eating slices of date loaf.
  There was no bird's nest in the chimney, nor any other impediment which
could easily be removed to solve the problem. They had just built the whole
thing wrongly, that's all, so that it was never going to work. My father
blamed God, who was usually at the bottom of his disappointments and failures.
He would regale visitors, unwittingly admiring the very englishy charm of
the fireplace, with the saga, telling them how he had always wanted an open
fire, how he had argued for it with the builders, how it had cost him extra
money which he could ill afford, how much he had been looking forward to
cold winters by the hearth, so that the guests could not help but laugh
at poor Robert's bad luck. But my father was seeking more than that, something
more than sympathetic amusement. He wanted confirmation from them for his
own belief that this story, after all, was only typical; that life,
indisputably, singled him out for particular punishment. Usually the guests,
still laughing, protested.

  &quot;Oh Bob, it's not that bad.&quot;

  &quot;It is,&quot; my father insisted, still smiling tightly but banging his teacup
in its saucer. &quot;It's always been the bloody same.&quot;

  The fireplace episode became a parable told to outsiders, of hopes not
realised, of pestilence, sent down to blight him.
  The installation of the electric heater each year marked the arrival of
winter, a season taken much more seriously by my parents since their move
to the mountains from the city's milder climate. We became intrepid pioneers,
battling the elements. We wore overcoats instead of cardigans, and protected
young plants from frosts. In 1969, it felt to me that winter signalled a
closing in, a shrinking of the world around me. Our family seemed to take
up permanently in a corner of the lounge room; the television and the heater
- still called the &quot;fire&quot; - became the dreary focus of daily life. My father
discouraged us from using the rest of the house: heating more than one room
was a waste of electricity. Summer, with its space, its light, its new year
bringing hopefulness, seemed remote, an impossible fantasy that would not
become real again until the taunting smell of jasmine in the September air
brought the heart up sharp. I hated the cold weather, the layers of warm
underwear and the early nightfall which demanded I be home early too. It
suffocated me more than summer's thick-scented heat.
  That winter the Americans put the first man on the Moon. For a few weeks
in June and July all other world events paled before it; as Apollo sailed
closer to its destination, it seemed the decade would end on a heroic note
after all.
  My father took a huge interest in the Apollo mission, and he tried to
arouse similar enthusiasm in my sister, and then in me. Neither of us
responded. For some reason that I could not quite define the whole business
annoyed me, it made me feel resentful, somehow, and irritable. Every time
I sat*sad down in front of the T.V. at home, or in front of the science
teacher at school, or switched on the radio, it was being discussed, people
were talking about it with pride and confidence. They were all hailing it
as the greatest thing ever: this voyage into space, into the unknown. But
I suppose that was just it, they all seemed so sure of what they would find
when they got there. I had already been assured that there would be no
surprises, that there was actually nothing there. No life, not even any trees
or grass, just dust. And craters. That's all, they kept assuring me, my
father, my teachers, some man who was interviewed on the radio. I kept hoping
they'd all be wrong, that when the astronauts actually arrived, when they
climbed out of the ship onto the dusty surface of the Moon that it would
instantly, spitefully, swallow them up, like quicksand. Or that people -
Moon people - would appear out of nowhere, and invite them home for a cup
of tea. That would give everyone something to carry on about. But that was
nonsense, they said, the Moon simply could not sustain life.

  &quot;Just matter floating around out there,&quot; my father said comfortably when
I asked him. &quot;Why don't you sit down and watch it?&quot; There was some programme
about it on the television. My mother smiled encouragingly at me and patted
the seat on the couch beside her.

  &quot;No thanks,&quot; I said, &quot;I'd die of boredom.&quot; I slouched off, feeling my
mother's disappointed gaze on my retreating back.

  In those days, I felt my mother's eyes were permanently implanted in between
my shoulder blades. As I left the house each morning to catch the bus, hitching
my school uniform up over its belt to make it shorter, I could sense her
watching me from the front door. Whenever I stalked out of the room in the
middle of a quarrel she'd remain, quietly observing my exit, gazing and
sighing after me. Once she stopped in the middle of washing up - I was standing
beside her, reluctantly drying - and stood staring out the kitchen window.
Her face quivered, as if she was about to cry.

  &quot;What's the matter?&quot; I said, uneasily.

  She turned towards me vaguely, I think she'd forgotten I was there or
something. After a moment her expression cleared, and I was relieved to
see she wasn't going to cry.


</sample>
