By Dorothy Johnston  

Back at the refuge, Garry played with the other kids after school. He played
dispiritedly, wanting to be inside. But Ruth couldn't stand him hanging
around her. She shooed him away.
  Jean tried to tempt him with colouring books. He was `too old for that
crap'. Linda, a girl about his age, sat on Jean's knee, and Jean read to
her while Garry sat in a corner, listening, but pretending not to.
  `I get headaches,' he announced, `when I have to stay inside all the time.'
  `The doctor tell you that, did he?'
  Garry nodded. `He told Mum.'
  He took a step towards the door, saying `I'll go and look for some feathers.
I'll go by myself.'
  Jean shifted her cramped legs, longing to throw out her arms and gather
him in. Garry stood at the door, pulled up to his full height, frightened,
daring her.
  Miranda had her hair cut off.
  Ruth stared at her daughter, who stood in the doorway brandishing her
crew cut.
  `Where did you get the money?'
  `I took it out of your purse.'
  `Let me feel,' said Garry.
  Miranda bent down and the boy rubbed his hand over the black fur.
  `It feels nice.'
  He snatched up the chocolates they were supposed to be sharing. `They're
mine, meany meena!'
  `Shut up!'
  `Shut up!'
  He ran, shouting, `Meany, meany miny mo!' His heart was twisting. She
didn't chase him. When he got to the garage and was staring wildly for a
place to hide, he knew that she hadn't bothered to chase him.
  Garry wet his bed at night, and Ruth complained. Waking up to the smell
of wetness, Garry sulked and said he was sick and couln't go to school.
  One of the new residents looked after him so that Ruth could take Miranda
to the pictures.
  In the theatre, both were relieved to sit in the dark and not have to
keep up a conversation. The film wasn't particularly good, but Ruth didn't
mind in the least. She let herself relax in her seat and occasionally looked
across at her daughter, catching a glint of eyeball turned towards the
screen, an expression that might be one of concentration or boredom.
  When Ruth re-crossed her legs, Miranda immediately felt restless and did
the same. She produced the sweets they'd bought at interval and handed them
across. Miranda looked at her mother, but Ruth, at that moment, kept her
eyes turned towards the screen, unwrapping the sweet cleverly, without looking,
and dropping it luxuriously on the floor in front of her.
  The newspapers were full of politics now. They turned the news off in
the evenings because it was all about the same thing. Jean came out of the
office and turned it on again, saying she wanted to watch it if they didn't,
saying that if Labor got thrown out then it was good-bye to the refuge.
  Faces passed on the screen, interviewers with the taste of blood in their
mouths. They were interrupted by one child, then another. Someone said,
`Look at that. He's forgot to shave.' `Shh,' said someone else. `What've
they done that's so terrible?'
  Jean said, `And not only that. It's good-bye to your pensions as well.'
  They talked about it after Jean had gone home, divided between those
who supported and those who condemned the government. It was Jean's way
of doing things; so often she was angry now, or appeared disdainful, which
got their backs up. 

It seemed like the first quiet afternoon for weeks. Ruth and Jean went out for 
a walk together.
  Across the road, the mass of the sea moved slowly towards the refuge.
  Ruth turned and looked back. `From the front, it looks like an ordinary
suburban house. But when you get inside, you realize it's not ordinary or
suburban at all.'
  Jean said, `No, it's not.'
  Ruth noticed, for the first time, that the creases around Jean's eyes
were permanent, and could only deepen with successive spring afternoons.
Weariness lined both their faces. A container ship was making for Port
Melbourne along the channel. Neat yachts danced. Ruth looked sideways at
Jean. There'd been no judgment, at least none that could, like a snake,
be grapsed behind the head with a forked stick. The residents were all
new. There'd been visits to the police, and legal aid. The date set for
the divorce was coming closer than she'd ever believed it could.
  Together they looked out over the bay, leaning on the railing in the
customary pose of travellers being photographed, those for whom the land,
invisible on the other side of the water, holds a common mystery. The sun
went in and out behind gathering clouds. They stared at a single stooped
figure, an old person in an overcoat pulled against the wind, scavenging
along the high water mark.
  Ruth said, `If I had to say one thing that was basic to human nature,
I would say the will to transcendence.'
  Jean asked again, `What really happened?' asking for the simple truth.
Ruth had heard her asking it of others, while she sat in the living-room
with a book on her knees.
  Yet there was a clear line of truth, or purpose, or energy, that ran through
the place and the people there. To Jean they were the same thing and, though
she couldn't share the young woman's faith, for a moment Ruth saw things
as she did.
  Jean was talking and Ruth had missed the beginning.
  `- something else. A common purpose, not based on self-denial. Suffering
can bring women together and they can help each other.'
  Ruth listened without answering. She knew that Jean was reaching out to
her as she'd never done before.
  The wood sang under her fingers with a song of recognition from which
sadness lifted momentarily, blown away by the equinoctial winds. She looked
down at the old, many-times-painted wood. Sadness and homesickness blew
away.
  She said, speaking slowly, as if to herself, `The line between an imaginary
world and the world of common experience may be more fluid than we think.
It always has been so, for me.'
  The moment when the storm would break grew nearer. Past the end of the
pier, the swell rose. Ruth felt the push of it, beyond their narrow horizon,
from the ocean forced through a narrow gap in the land. And lording it over
that great moving canyon of water, behind a cliff top, was the home she
had left.
  `We're going to get caught,' Jean said. `Come on. Let's go to Leo's. I'll
buy you a gelati.'
  `Ice-cream? On a day like this?'
  `Let me shout you,' said Jean. `I'd like to.'
  They ran. The first big splotches of rain caught them as they waited for
a break in the traffic. Ruth laughed for Jean's sake and made a face as
she pulled at strands of hair.
  `Rain makes your hair curly,' Jean shouted over the noise of the 
semi-trailers.
  They reached the first of the shop verandahs as the sky opened, prepared
to let them have it.

Jean told Garry a story about a witch in a forest who was really kind and
good, but no-one believed her.
  `Ding dong, the witch is dead,' sang the little boy softly. He already knew
the story, since they had so few books.
  `Read me the three pigs,' he commanded. `Little pig, litle pig, let me
come in!' he squealed, confusing the voices of storybook animals.
  Jean asked him questions, to which he answered no, or nothing. He avoided
his sister whenever possible. He did drawings for Ruth, which she pinned up
over her bunk. One night, when he was tired, he called Jean Mummy, and later,
the next morning, remembered and poked her in the leg with a biro.
  Jean took him for a walk to the pier. The sea was oily and had a bad smell.
Jean said it was the drain. Whether he believed in the power of the drains
or not, the smell entered the boy's head and stayed there, so that later,
when he felt sick, he blamed them.
  There was something else, a grey shadow at the end of his bed. He said
to Jean, `I saw Dad on the pier.'
  `No you didn't,' she told him.
  Garry found a place, beside the pier and often in its shadow, between
rocks where people sat dipping their legs with their jeans rolled up, that
reminded him of the swamp at home. It was nothing like the swamp to look
at, but he felt safe there, as he did nowhere else along that stretch of
suburban beach, or in the house or the park beyond it. It was a place where
you could always find something new, usually rubbish brought in with the
tide, bits of clothing, buttons, bits of fishing line, once a kitchen knife
that he snatched up and cleaned back at the refuge, in the garage, keeping
it out of sight because if anyone saw him with it, it would be confiscated.
  It was as public as the swamp was private. Underneath, at low tide, the
sand stayed damp, and the green smell of the sea was mixed with those of
sweat and take-away food and diesel oil. Not truly alone; there'd be a group
of refuge women and kids up the beach, or a couple of roster women with
half a dozen kids who kept an eye on him from a distance. Garry looked about
for what was new, putting this or that in his pocket. There might be a man
or woman eating lunch out of a paper bag. People watched him. Sometimes
the lines of their gaze passed right through him and out into what his hands
were doing.
  The day he saw his father, he'd got away without anyone seeing him. The
sea was blowing grey and ugly. He thought he'd wait for the tide to go out
far enough so that he could sit under the pier. On a day like this, there
wouldn't be anyone else. It was then that he saw Ken, walking down the road
to the pier and still some distance away.
  First he saw a man in a brown overcoat, walking the way his father walked.
He knew before he said to himself, it's Dad, that the man had been wearing
that coat all winter.
  He couldn't dash under the pier and hide, or even bob down. The sea hit
the stone wall. Garry put his hand in his mouth and bit it, then ran a few
steps along the road.
  `Dad.'
  Ken held out his good hand and Garry took it.
  `What're you doing here, Dad?'
  `I came up to see you.'
  `Does Mum know?'
  `Not yet.'
  Hoping Ken would follow, Garry began to head off along the pier. Some
of the men turned to look at them. Ken raised his eyebrows in a puzzled
way and his face, to strangers, might have looked as if it was appealing
to them.
  `Are you all right? What about Miranda?'
  `She's okay.'
  `Are you going to school?'
  `Of course.'
  `What about today?'
  `Today's different. Dad, did you know that here they use different rods?'
  `What?'
  `Rods. For fish. And they hardly ever catch any. Did you bring Collingwood?'
  `No, silly, of course not.'
  `We live in a white house. Have you seen it?'
  Ken hesitated, then gave a brief nod. By this time they'd walked to the
end of the pier and back. He said, `I'm going now. I think you'd better
be getting back.'
  `What for? I'm staying till lunch-time.'
  `Don't argue with me Garry. I'll wait here. Go on now.'
  They'd reached the intersection. Ken stood back for Garry to press the
lights at the pedestrian crossing.
  Garry looked back once, knowing his father would be watching. At the
corner he hesitated again, then turned towards the laneway, the way he'd
come. It was right that his father should appear while he was thinking about
him.

