By Avigan  

  Poitr came on the box in prime time, just after the news.
Not the Poitr of today. The one of six months ago. It was a film clip taken
of her singing in the cathedral, just before the choir's European tour. I
hadn't known it existed. Good TV, this. The researchers hadn't been sleeping.
No mistaking, either, what stance Mr. Les Mayberry was going to take. The
fallen angel. I hoped Poitr was strong enough. She'd need a cool head and
a tight arse. Shit, this was big league stuff.
  Unlike most chat-shows, this one was not done in front of a live audience.
Which was fortunate, I thought. From the safety of an auditorium the sneaky,
yellow bastards, and bitches - in fact, especially the bitches - could hurl
abuse. (Pearl one, plain one, like they used to do watching Dr. Guillotine's
nifty little invention going through its paces.) Poitr would have had to
fight on two fronts, and with the kind of blind antagonism you can expect
from the idiots who attend live chat-shows, the "blue-rinse" brigade, it
would just have been messy. No, in a one-to-one interview she was more
likely to accomplish something. Though it wasn't going to be easy. Goliath
had won the toss - by virtue of his position - so it was him to break. And
with that film clip, it was tantamount to sinking ten reds and leaving Poitr
with one helluva snooker.
  Abba, Poitr and I had been met in reception by a down-the-line public
relations officer, what is known in the trade as a flower arranger. She was
all plastic smiles as she led us through a maze of corridors, pointed out
the attractions like the giant props department, and deposited Poitr in
make-up. Everyone filmed in a studio has to be covered in a quarter inch of
grease.
  "And if you'll come this way," she said to Abba and me, "there is a waiting
room next door."
  She left us there alone, and twenty minutes later Poitr came in, hardly
daring to move for the pack on her face. She went to a mirror and patted at
it with a tissue. If she dug long enough, I thought, she might even excavate
her face. Then she sat down next to Abba, closed her eyes, and began to hum
softly.
  Abba did none of the things fathers would normally do if their fifteen-
year-old ward was about to go on television. Not a local, housewives' mid-
morning show. The top-rated, prime-time, nationally-televised, Les Mayberry
blood-and-guts show. You watched Les Mayberry if you liked watching the lion
eat the Christian. All Abba did was radiate his inner peace.
  A door marked "Personnel only" opened into the waiting room.
  "Well, well, well. So this is the young lady who's caused such a stir.
Couldn't very well miss you, now could we?"
  It wasn't Les Mayberry. There would have to be more handing up the line
before you met Him. This was just some guy out of a toothpaste ad. He took
us down more corridors till we got to a studio, where he introduced us to
the producer. From here on, Poitr was on her own. Abba and I were ushered
to the control room where we could look down on the studio through a large
panel of glass, or sit and watch a bank of monitors if we preferred that.
Until the show started, what happened down below was a silent movie.
  I was so damn nervous that time became distorted and the figures down below
moved in a dream. I saw Him come on, shake hands with Poitr, and motion her
to her seat on a rostrum. He sat down in the only other chair, half profile
to viewers when he faced her. Three huge cameras jockeyed at the starting
gate. There were hand signals everywhere, Mayberry did a last-second
superfluous adjustment to his perfectly knotted tie, jutted his jaw to pull
the loose skin out of a too-tight collar - that's where age really shows: in
the skin of the neck - and suddenly the monitors in front of us flared. There 
was the angel in white, singing in her virgin-pure voice. Ten seconds of that, 
and the producer cut to the studio, a close-up of Les Mayberry.
  "Good evening, viewers, and welcome to the Les Mayberry Show. You might
think that film clip fell into this programme by some mistake. After all,
what you were told to expect from us tonight was an interview with the
Minister for Overseas Development, on Biafra- No, that wasn't the Minister
you just saw."
  He paused, knowing there would be laughter in a million homes.
  "Our other guest here tonight is what lovers of Ionesco are calling The Bald
Prima Donna."
  I don't know why, but I had a feeling that line came from his team of
researchers. It just didn't sit well on his tongue.
  "Now that film clip is of the same lady in, what shall we say, happier
times?" Meaningful pause. "Before we bring you Miss Poitr Lefevre in person
- she's sitting right here in the studio with me - we'll show you another
film clip, this time taken at yesterday's Carnival procession."
  And there it was on the monitors. I have to admit, it was extremely well
done. The film ran at normal speed right to the moment her hand went up and
gripped the scarf. Then it jerked, freeze-frame to freeze-frame, the way
they do with footage of presidents being assassinated. They ran it through
twice like that, and the dramatic impact was enormous. Then came The Twist.
  The insiduous menace of television was demonstrated here to its fullest.
Once again it was the credibility of the half-truth that did the work. What
you saw on the box did actually happen. It's not a bunch of actors re-
enacting a scene so as to give it its slant. It is, very simply, the way it
is put together. You notice this ability of television to twist the meaning
of things if you were personally involved in an incident that is
then featured on the box. It is all done in selection and editing, and at
all film schools they have a course on how it can be misused, accompanied
by talks on ethics. It seems the ethics, most often, are forgotten.
  But the disease goes deeper still. Even people who themselves have been
slandered in one programme, will be sucked in and suckered by the very next
programme. But this is not credible, you'll say. For a while at least,
surely, they will be circumspect about anything that appears on television?
I'm afraid that in practice it does not work like that. Television is the
most powerful, the most addictive, and potentially the most destructive of
all drugs. If you think this is a load of crap, the maniacal ramblings of
some sort of nut with a grudge, then get a load of this: just recently some
TV programme did an expose of a hair spray that made people's hair fall out.
Now with that kind of damage to their product, you would have thought the
manufacturers would have gone into liquidation the very next week. Well,
what actually happened is documented, so you can check up on it. What
happened was, the very next week their sales doubled. Yes, doubled.
  Somehow, the visual image predominates, and while shoppers quickly forgot
the connection with the image, they remembered the image. So when confronted
by rows and rows of hair spray in the supermarket, they went for the
familiar one.
  Which brings us to the visual image which Mr. Les Mayberry chose now to
screen. It was of that tousle-haired, pasty-skinned, conscientiously
unattractive Women's Libber with her grotesque "up yours" gesture.
  Poitr was fully aware of all the manipulations and insinuations, even at age
fifteen. I know, because it was she who explained it to me afterwards. For
Poitr to try and outgun Mayberry would have been as useless as farting
against thunder. So she stayed small, used silence to its full effect,
and waited for him to get reckless enough to fall into the pit he was
digging for her.
  The camera cut back to a long shot of him and Poitr - the audience's first
glimpse of her in the studio. As the camera zoomed in on her face, Mayberry's 
voice did the introduction. Poitr did not move or say anything, just looked 
demurely and calmly at her hands in her lap. She was wearing a plain, simple 
"teenage" dress. Her head was uncovered, there for a million or three viewers 
to stare at. The camera just stayed on her, demanding she say something, like 
maybe "Good evening" or "Glad to be here". Damn it, didn't she know the form? 
The producer caught up with the situation and pulled back to a long shot.
  Mayberry was made of harder metal. His smirk was in place as he goaded
Poitr.
  "Well, not very pretty when you have to look at it, now is it?" A TV monitor
stood in front of them and a little to the side, so they had seen the film
clips.
  Poitr raised her head slowly and though her expression was neutral, those
emerald eyes must have burnt him. It wasn't their colour he didn't like, it
was their confidence.
  "No," she said. "I would be gracious in victory." My phrase.
  "Then how come you are tied in with that lot? Tell us about it. We are most
curious. Not that I have anything against Women's Lib," he lied,
genuflecting invisibly to the ratings, "but the way you people behaved
yesterday, I must say ... But tell us all about it. When did you first join
their ranks, when did you first become, as it were, an activist? A
militant?"
  "Mr. Mayberry. I have as much connection with the Women's Libbers as you
have with the Southern Iranian Carpet Weavers' Association. None. I am a
member of a church choir, and of a conservatorium of music, and a college.
I am not a member of anything else at all. Nor am I a free agent for any
group, nor particularly sympathetic to any movement. What is more, what I
did yesterday had absolutely nothing at all to do with the liberation of
women."
  "Then what the - Why did you do it?"
  He was definitely off balance. Good. Poitr would use that. With a bounce off
the cushion she had managed to sink her first red and was all lined up on
the black. But she wasn't going to put it all out, right off. He would just
shoot it down. Let him see a bit at a time. That way he wouldn't know
exactly what he was supposed to be firing at. But she had even better than
that in store for him. She was going to let him fight on her side.
Unwittingly, of course. By the time he realised what she was doing it would
be too late, she would have won the day. Then it was up to his intelligence
whether he conceded graciously, or went skittling back to his
corner. In a funny way, I began to feel sorry for Goliath.
  "Do what, Mr. Mayberry?"
  "Why, that!" He waved wildly at the monitor in front of them. He was
exasperated, he had nothing to hold onto.
  "Please tell me what I did, Mr. Mayberry."
  He would have to take up the challenge. He couldn't afford to have his
viewers see a kid deflate him. He answered quickly, because that is the way
with chat-shows: rapid-fire, slick repartee, especially at the level of the
Les Mayberry Show. If he had slowed down just a bit he might have caught
himself before he tumbled headlong, but old habits die hard.
  "You disgraced your university and humiliated the people who had elected you
Carnival Queen. You had been chosen to grace the main float, to be an attractive symbol, so that the people of your city would come and give money to a noble charity. 

