Twilight hours By Ann Granat  

"Have you been rushing? You sound out of breath." 
  Margaret's calm voice washes over me on the telephone, without cooling. 
I want to smash the receiver down, I want to scream, I want to splatter 
terrible words into Margaret's well-manicured universe.
  Instead, I mutter something about the heat and close my eyes. I imagine
Margaret in this twilight hour in her large, cool house, a gin-and-tonic in
hand. Her children fed and pyjamaed, her dinner-table prepared, in
anticipation of Robert, husband and father. He is on his way, a modern
messiah, manoeuvring the Volvo through the city traffic.
  I am being unfair - it's jealousy. I am jealous of Margaret and Robert,
jealous of their lives. They have order and control, the best of all
possible worlds.
  I could not imagine Margaret ever losing control. Her ancestors, solid
Anglo-Saxons, carefully guard her against any untoward show of emotions.
Unlike me, she has no melancholy middle-European ghost in her cupboard. My
latest one, an ancient Austro-Hungarian aunt, quite recently jumped off a
high baroque building in Vienna. For the occasion she wore a red silk
kimono from the Thirties, with a large embroidered gold butterfly on the
back.

I don't ever confide in Margaret, I don't unburden. From our first meeting
at university, fifteen years ago, she pegged the boundaries of our friendship.
We walk in pleasant meadows, but never venture into the hot arid lands
beyond.
  The best she can do for me under the circumstances is another dinner-party
invitation. The conversation will be light, the food Provencal. "Don't
forget, drinks at seven."
  I am touched that she doesn't ask me to bring a partner. Being an unmatched
guest, the odd number out will surely spoil the symmetry of an otherwise
perfect dinner table.
  A gift of loyalty I hope to take with grace.

The twilight hours have almost passed. For us, they are the worst. Things
change in the twilight hours. The house is full of shapes out of control.
Shadows extend darkly. They threaten. They will swallow us if we let them.
  Now that the evening has come I turn on all the lamps. Yellows, saffrons,
reds - the small house is ablaze.
  A strip of gold shows under his door, but there is no sound - my son locks
himself into his room straight after dinner. He can barely wait to leave the
kitchen table, where we sit opposite each other. He says nothing while we
eat. He doesn't look at me. He swallows his food quickly without any show
of pleasure. His face is guarded, locked against me. "How was school today?" 
I ask. He doesn't answer.
  I keep up a false monologue, words burn my throat as they surface.
Aimlessly, like ashes, they scatter and fall. Green rattan mats on the
table, red roses in a vase, roast chicken with all the trimmings. These are
my offerings to him, my penance.

At home he spends most of his time in his room with his cats. He has
collected four since we came to live here, six months ago.
  The sleek black Tom reminds me of Mac, the cat we used to have in the other
house. This one has the same self-assured walk, the same smooth-soft coat,
unblinking green eyes that go right through you into an invisible world
beyond. When we left, Mac was twelve, the same age as my son, but ancient
in cat-years. Too set in his territorial ways, he violently resisted our every
attempt to take him with us. In the end he had to be put down.
  The others are two tabby females, sisters from the same litter, and a ginger
male in constant competition with the black. My son brought them home one
by one, in spite of all my appeals and threats. He has given them names, but
he won't tell me what they are.

My son is usually well home before me. He rides his bike from the local high
school, just a few streets away.
  The school where I teach is on the other side of Melbourne, in one of the
western suburbs. My students are wary teenagers with bristly, multicolored 
hair and bad teeth. Restlessly they bide their time. They smash windows and 
smear graffiti on walls. Most come from broken  homes and have themselves been 
broken a long time ago. I was lucky to get the  job in the first place - I had 
not taught for more than twelve years, but my qualifications were still all 
right.
  For English I teach them survival skills, though they would rather be
watching videos. This week we saw two - on werewolves. They loved the second
one best because of all the blood and gore. It kept them orderly and calm.

My grandmother believed in werewolves. She even knew one once. I used to sit
petrified on her wide black-skirted lap when she talked about it.
  There was a man who lived in her village when she was a young girl. A
farmer, an ordinary decent fellow, he `turned' one night without warning,
when the moon was at its most fearsome, its fullest. He howled so horribly
that everyone in the village bolted their doors and put their lights out.
My grandmother just managed to catch a glimpse of him through a crack in the
door. He was a horrible sight: wild hair, fangs, red-hot bulging eyes and
all. His wife, the fool that she was, let him in. "And what do you think he
did?" my grandmother would ask, while I shivered. "He tore her into pieces,
limb by limb. Then he disappeared. No one ever saw him again."
  No full moon for me. I `turn' in the twilight hours, surely a time more
appropriate to life in the suburbs.

Driving home from work this afternoon I was full of good intentions. In
spite of the heat I felt almost serene.
  I stopped to get some ice-cream, his favorite, the layered kind with the
chocolate in the middle.
  We would go to the beach, I decided - it's only a few minutes by car. He has
loved the sea ever since he was a toddler. He can swim way out into the deep
now.
  Last summer we went to the beach a lot. The three of us. On Sundays we would
take a picnic lunch: fresh fruit, orange juice, sandwiches carefully wrapped
in foil, and a bottle of champagne. Sometimes we would stay all afternoon.
In this world of soft sand and ultramarine sky, my husband and I drank
champagne. When we playfully clinked our glasses I thought we were
celebrating life. I didn't suspect we were sealing my betrayal.

I arrived home around six. The twilight hours had already begun. The day
had paled from the heat, leaving behind a dull, discolored image of itself.
Sprinklers hummed rhythmically on front lawns, cars pulled into driveways.
Husbands returned home from work, families prepared for the evening.
Sheltered by rituals of habit, they were unaware of shadows growing.
  There was no sign of his bike. When I unlocked the front door, two of the
cats dashed out from inside, the ginger chasing the black. They jumped
across the side fence and disappeared. The two tabbies were asleep,
decorously curled up on my bed. My bedroom curtain was in tatters on one
side, the scattered pink shreds glinting in the sunlight.
  The house was filled with a pungent smell. He had locked the cats in again
this morning. They had been trapped inside the house all day. His clothes
were thrown all over the loungeroom, broken glass and cornflakes littered
the kitchen floor, dirty dishes everywhere.
  A trivial situation. Most kids are untidy; they don't care, they easily
forget. 
  Yet I stood in the kitchen, crying. I couldn't stop the tears. They weren't
mine. They belonged to the other - to the one who lost control. Rough
fingers pushed her forehead from inside, any minute her head would explode.
She rushed to the bathroom for painkillers, tore at the tin foil. She scooped 
water into her hands, gulped it down, almost choking. The tablets scraped her 
throat like stale crumbs of toast. She felt dizzy, nauseated, her hands 
wouldn't stop shaking. She wanted to run, but the house trapped her inside. 
She ran from room to room, pushing up windows, throwing doors open. The hot, 
dry wind beat through, the old weatherboards rattled and creaked.
  In a frenzy she tried to tidy up, getting rid of the glass fragments, the
dirty clothes, the mess on the carpet. But it was useless. She couldn't get
rid of the fear, the dreadful anticipation.
  She knew she was running out of time, the shadows were dangerously close.
Waiting. She had to put the house in order, restore it to peace, before the
shadows arrived.
  Full of familiar objects from the past, illusions of another life, the house
was one solid thing. It had to be kept whole, no matter what.
  Her son came home. She heard him whistle for the cats, she could see him now
in the half-light of the doorway: a tall, gawky boy with curly, dark, untidy
hair, carrying the black cat in his arms. The other cats pranced around him,
rubbing against his legs in ecstasy.
  He went past her without a word, his shoes leaving soggy, brown imprints on
the carpet. "Look what you have done!" she screamed.
  He ignored her and walked towards the kitchen with the cats in tow. She ran
after him, barring his way, but he pushed past. Humming an insolent pop
tune, he placed the black cat carefully on the kitchen bench and opened the
fridge. He began to rummage inside it.
  The pressure in her head exploded. Blinding red spots danced in circles, she
couldn't blink them away. Her heart attacked her rib-cage like some trapped
thing within. She recognised the howling sounds that came from her throat.
They belonged to a wild beast.
  She seized her son by the shoulders, ripping into his skin with her
fingernails. She could feel his blood in her hands. She pushed him against
the hard metal of the fridge, hitting him across the face, pulling at his
hair, clawing into his chest. It went on and on, she couldn't stop herself.
She couldn't see his face from the shadows that collected all around. His
body felt limp, it offered no resistance. Suddenly she became aware of a
shrill noise breaking through. It came from somewhere close. The phone.
Releasing her son, she picked up the receiver.
  "Have you been rushing? You sound out of breath." Margaret asked.
  The twilight hours were almost over.

Tonight is Margaret's dinner party. I am alone, getting ready. He has gone.
His father suddenly remembered him and claimed him for the weekend. He
waited for his father all morning, standing outside with his overnight bag.
I heard the car pull up and watched from behind the curtain. I saw my
husband for a minute. He was suntanned and looked better than I had hoped.
  She was with him in the car, but I couldn't see much of her. When I believed
her to be my friend I thought her very beautiful. Large green eyes,
enigmatic mouth, soft relaxed body... She is the sort of woman men want
to look after. But underneath, like a cat, she is tough, shrewd and self-
reliant.

The dress I am wearing tonight is of cool black silk. Sleeveless, with a
large grey bird appliqued on the front. The bird is in flight, wings
extended, and gleaming silver eyes. I hope wearing a dress like that will
give me confidence. At least it's a conversation piece.
  I have driven only a couple of blocks when I hear a noise from the back of
the car. It's the black cat. He must have climbed into the car through the open
window and gone to sleep. He is a young cat, not yet unsettled by change; he
seems to be enjoying this unexpected ride. 

