State's programs will stay despite demise of CEP HEATHER McKENZIE  

  DESPITE the impending termination of the Commonwealth Computer Education 
Program (CEP) in January, computer education in NSW is alive and well, the 
head of the Computer Education Unit, Dr Ian Pirie, said in Sydney last week.
  Dr Pirie was speaking at the Computer Education Unit's (CEU) software 
suppliers' meeting.
  "The NSW Government has recognised that computer education is a priority 
funding area and subsequently we were untouched in the State Budget," he said.
  Dr Pirie admitted, however, that the CEU had no idea what repercussions the 
program's end would have.
  The unit's staffing arrangements were uncertain, with only five positions 
assured next year, he said.  
  Representatives of software suppliers, the Curriculum Development Centre, the
Catholic Education Office, the State Department of Education, the Federal
Attorney-General's Department, the ACT Schools Authority and the Queensland 
Department of Education attended the meeting.
  Several issues relating to the supply of software for educational purposes 
were discussed.  These included how the unit evaluates software, the proposed 
National Software Coordination Unit (NSCU) and the software industry's view 
of the education market.
  There were also group sessions where the question of copyright and the 
future development of software were addressed.
  "Software is the key to computer education.  Without good software, the 
rest of the equipment is a waste of time," Dr Pirie said.
  "We are here because communication is the key to developing good 
educational software."
  A main problem was that industry was not generally aware of what 
constituted good educational software, he said.
  A lack of communication between education departments and software houses 
had led to the industry not knowing what the education departments required.

  Many software suppliers, however, expressed concern that the lack of 
communication with education departments meant they only knew what was wanted 
after a product was released and found to be wanting.
  It was suggested that software suppliers be given access to evaluation by 
education departments before the final product was released.
  Dr Pirie agreed with the idea, encouraging the suppliers to submit their 
programs for evaluation.
  He said the unit was keen to become involved in this.
  The general opinion among suppliers was that the amount of feedback from the 
Department of Education was not high.  The onus seemed to be on the software 
suppliers to submit their programs for evaluation.
  One of the major tasks of the unit is to advise teachers what constitutes 
good educational software.
  The CEU also has a limited software development committee, called Caresoft, 
which develops specialist educational software.
  "This group meets the needs we don't think industry would take up,"  Dr 
Pirie said.
  A member of the CEU software team, Ms Denise Tolhurst, explained how the 
unit evaluated software.
  The CEU has published 180 software evaluations.  These evaluations are based 
on a form sent to teachers who are chosen primarily through contacts made at 
workshops.  
  One problem with the evaluations is that they are not often tested in the 
field.  Problems of time have so far prevented this, although it is one of the 
unit's long-term objectives.  
 Software is evaluated either by a teacher, a regional consultant or officers 
at the CEU.  They rely on software being submitted by the suppliers for 
evaluation.  If a program is given to the unit, it is kept in the resource 
centre where teachers can access it for themselves. 
  "The purpose of the evaluations is to provide a guide to teachers.  It 
should not be considered as an authoritative assessment of the 
program," Ms Tolhurst said.
  Some of the software suppliers expressed doubts about the evaluation.  It 
was suggested that some formal group should be established so evaluations 
could take place in a workshop environment, with input from a number of 
teachers, as opposed to individual assessment  Ms Tolhurst said some evaluations were already conducted in workshops, but 
there was no formal scope for such groups at present.  The unit would ideally 
like to conduct evaluations in that way, but the time it took to do so - three 
to four weeks - did not allow it. 
  "The cessation of Commonwealth funding has not made computer education a dead 
issue,"  Dr Pirie said.
  "The whole area of computer education is really moving ahead.  Other 
sections of the NSW Education Department are working on it as well.
  "For example, a building code for computer rooms is being formulated and 
others are looking at creating criteria for qualified computer education 
teachers."
                                               
