Lumley accounts declared invalid By HEATHER KILLEN  

  Edward Lumley Ltd's 1986 accounts, directors' report and notice of meeting 
were declared invalid yesterday by Mr Justice Needham in orders handed down in 
the NSW Supreme Court.
  The orders followed the judgment handed down on Monday concerning a dispute 
between Lumley and BT Insurance Ltd, controlled by Mr Brent Potts and Mr Brian 
Yuill, over seats on the Lumley board.
  BT Insurance, a 23 per cent shareholder in Lumley, has nominated two 
candidates for election to the board at the company's forthcoming annual 
general meeting.
  However, Lumley directors stated in a circular to shareholders that only 
three directors could be elected, and the Lumley family, 55 per cent 
shareholders, had thrown its weight behind the incumbents.
  On Monday, Mr Justice Needham ruled that four directors could be elected to 
the Lumley board because of a technical breach which occurred in 1982.
  In accordance with the company's articles of association, Mr Anthony 
Crichton-Brown should have been re-elected as a director when he resigned as 
an executive director and assumed the role of managing director in 1982.
  However, the election did not take place and a vacancy on the board has 
existed since that time.
  Mr Justice Needham said yesterday that the company's notice of meeting, 
directors' report and accounts contained irregularities which may cause 
substantial injustice that could not be remedied by order of the court.
  He ordered Lumley to inform shareholders as soon as possible that the annual 
general meeting would not take place on November 5 as scheduled, and that new 
notice of meeting, accounts and reports would be sent out in due course.
  He also ordered the company to issue new notice, accounts and reports, and 
point out to shareholders the changes made to these documents.
  Further, the company must send out new proxy forms and is restrained from 
counting any previous proxies.
  Lumley was also ordered to pay all costs incurred by the action.
  Justice Needham said BT Insurance's nominations to the Lumley board were 
still valid, as was the special resolution the company will put to the Lumley 
meeting to change the terms of the employee share scheme.

