BIG BROTHER IS GETTING BIGGER  

TRADITIONAL Australian qualities of individuality, non-conformity 
and self-reliance have been severely eroded in a year, according 
to a leading civil liberties group.
  It has laid the blame for stifling much of the country's 
development at the door of governments and their "big 
brother" urge to control people's lives.
  Australian Civil Liberties Union president John Bennett  said 
recent calls to introduce identity cards and to use telephone 
taps were the latest assaults on privacy.
  The Federal Government wants to introduce the identity card to control
tax evasion, illegal immigration and security fraud.
 There have been calls to legalise telephone tapping to combat organised
crime and drug dealing.
  "Individually, the extensions of Federal and State government powers
are often understandable and to some extent justifiable," said Mr Bennett,
who is also a lawyer.
  "But the overall effect is to make us a more tightly controlled society
with often unnecessary surveillance."
  The Civil Liberties Union cited several areas where people's rights had
been intruded upon in recent years, particularly under the present Federal
Government:   
  Attempted introduction of a national identity card;
  Planned phone-tapping and the examination of mail to combat drug offences;
  Introduction of random breath testing;
  Proposed Bill of Rights and Human Rights Commission;
  Questioning of the jury system;
  Assets test on pensions;
  Using investigators - in some cases with more power than police - in the
Medicare system;
  Photographs on some drivers' licences and train tickets.
  Mr Bennett accused governments, and the bureaucracy, of manipulating
emotional issues to gain public support for increased surveillance 
measures.         
  "People read about the tragic effects of drugs and they give the OK for
phone-tapping and identity cards without considering threats to civil
liberties," he said.
  "These measures had little effect in the U.S.
  "The danger of ID cards is they can be used to monitor the activities
of citizens.
  "The cards must be produced on demand of the government which makes them
almost an internal passport."    
    
