Apartheid and the Ella brothers  

POLITICS and sport clashed head on today when the 47 members of the Australian
Rugby Union met in a `closed to the press' discussion.
  As the Aussie dollar tumbled on world-wide money markets, Australian unions
baulked at superannuation and taxation deals and the Prime Minister, Mr
Hawke, urged the nation to buy and think Australian, the Australian Rugby
Union were asked to consider accepting an invitation for an official team
to tour South Africa, centre of world attention.
  The nation of P.W. Botha, Prime Minister of a country where apartheid
rules the roost and white has might; where some 3000 have been locked up
without trial since a state of emergency was declared almost a month ago
and 1500 - mostly black - have perished since Christmas.
  A nation which is under the threat of economic sanctions from the West
- and a nation of some 5 million whites which can lay claim to being Rugby
Union's world champions, despite two decades of international `exile' from
the amateur game.
 Somehow, the Springboks, South Africa's national Rugby team, has survived,
despite the world's condemnation of the Johannesburg Government 
and its black and white policies.
  "They are the team to beat," said Mark Ella, the only man to notch tries
against each of the Home Countries on the first grand slam Wallaby tour
- who wouldn't go when asked to play in the Durban Sevens.
  His twin brother, Glen, Randwick and Australian fullback, did - but younger
brother, Gary, now an officer with the Aboriginal Affairs Department and
working out of Bourke, wouldn't have a bar of it.
  The tremendous trio spent hours discussing the various invitations to
Botha land.
  In just the one family, albeit Australian Rugby Union's finest family
since the Thornett brothers, dissension was rife.
  And the cause of the blue was South Africa, football and politics.
  Mark, former Australian captain, was offered money to play with a "Rest
of the World XV" when the Springboks were desperate to flex their Rugby
Union muscles.
  It would have been a deal similar to the one offered to the Australian
rebel cricketers who lost to Graeme Pollock's team last summer.
   Glen, along with David Campese and Roger Gould, played in the Durban
Sevens.  They weren't paid.
  But nagging away at the minds of all those sportsmen was the question:
Are we doing the right thing?
  Mark Ella, pin-up for more kids than you can poke a stick at, well knows
his responsibilities.
  He also respects the right of the individual.
  Said Mark, who was told he would be `an honorary white' if he had accepted 
the South African offer: "As an individual, I wouldn't go to South Africa,
honorary white or not.
  "If the ARU (Australian Rugby Union) today decides to accept the invitation
to tour, and I was selected, I would tour.
  "I wouldn't want to let my country down.  A player, I feel, has to put
his country first and it's an honor to be chosen to play for your country.
  "It's also a tremendous feeling to be recognised as one of the world's
best.
  "Had an official Australian team been going to South Africa when I was
playing - and if I'd been selected - I'd have been proud to go.
  "And I'd have stayed in the same hotel as Alan Jones and the rest of the
team.
  "As an individual, I refused to go.  As an aboriginal, I can't condone
the South African Government's policies.
  "I feel that, if I went as Mark Ella, person, not Mark Ella, member of
the Australian team, I would have been doing so (condoning Botha's bullies).
  "Glen had the right to go, but I don't think he'll go again, team or
individual.  Everybody has the right to go - I chose not to.
  "At the same time, putting on my rugby hat, the Springboks are the team
to beat.
  "They've just beaten the New Zealand Cavaliers and no country can really
lay claim to being world champions unless they've beaten the 'Boks.
  "It's a crying shame they aren't allowed to play - every Rugby player
wants to play in or against South Africa.
  "It's the biggest challenge in rugby, that's why they'll keep offering
tours and rugby countries will keep accepting them."
  While the 47-man ARU will meet today at Rushcutters Bay to discuss the
South African invitation - and its repercussions on Brisbane's tilt for
the 1992 Olympics and Australia's standing in the sporting community at
large - only 12 actually get to vote on the issue.

