Visiting broker likes sound of his own fund By Dan Brooks  

SOUTH African born Martin Simpson is a New York stockbroker channeling 
Australian investors' money into international high-technology stocks.
  It calls for rapid decisions from the investment guru who has a machine-gun 
like patter to match.
  He was in Sydney last week extolling the locally-managed fund that bears his 
name, The Martin Simpson High Technology Fund.
  Offering a quick apology - he had only 13 minutes to spare for a hotel 
lobby interview before darting to a North Sydney business meeting - he 
delivered what has come to be a condemnation of our high-tech hopefuls.
  "Many of the smaller companies here in the high-tech field are new ideas and 
blue sky and bit of this and a bit of that," he said.
  "We are cautious on the Australian high technology field because many of the 
companies are less seasoned (than their over-seas counterparts).
  "They're more venture capital than high-tech."
  But Mr Simpson's attitude seems to have softened since a visit last 
February.
  The fund did not have a cent in the local market then.
  He was reported as saying some were "accidents waiting to happen."
  Since then, the fund has added five home-grown companies to its global 
portfolio of technology and health care stocks: Sarich Technologies, Icom, 
Memtec, Idaps and Peptide.
  "We bought, in spite of my protestations to the contrary, a few shares (3000, 
it ensues) in Sarich at about $8.60," he said this week.
  "They're now $20 and, knock on wood, seem to be heading in the right 
direction."
  Even so, Australian stocks accounts for a mere 1.3 per cent of the fund's 
overall value.
  The unlisted fund is managed by ABC Fund Managers, part of Melbourne 
businessman, Joseph Gutnick's First Investors Securities Ltd.
  Funds raised have doubled to $13.5 million over the past six months and the 
portfolio's capital growth has tipped 36 per cent.
  Reasons for setting up a local fund bearing his name are simple.  He has a 
sister living in Australia. 
  He intends launching the fund in New Zealand on this visit.
  Born in Capetown, Mr Simpson went to Michaelhouse school, Natal, where one of 
his school chums was Robert Holmes a Court.
  They next met when Mr Simpson came to Perth during a two-year honeymoon in 
the early 60s.
  "Robert was then driving a taxi to pay his way through the University of 
West Australia.
  "The last time we spoke, he was thinking in billions."
  Mr Simpson settled in New York in 1965 and eight years later formed the 
Martin Simpson & Co Inc stockbroking firm specialising in monitoring 
technology enterprises.
  He said:  "For us, high-tech means well established companies with good 
growth prospects and very strong managements.
  "We are very, very selective.
  "Most of the equities we invest in will continue to be European, Japanese 
or American although we certainly have a place for Australian stocks to 
participate."
  Good decisions were vital because world high-tech stocks have been generally 
depressed over the past three years.
  Many stocks sell at 20c in the dollar.
  They won't all go back to a dollar but a number will, he said.

