Kuta cashes in on devaluation bonus By Jeremy Clift  

  INDONESIA'S big devaluation has turned the spectacular equatorial
archipelago of sparkling beaches and ancient temples into a bargain for
travellers.
  Sun-seekers on the holiday island of Bali can now get rooms for as little
as three of four dollars a night along Kuta Beach, a favourite with
back-packers.  
  The Indonesian airline Garuda is offering cut-price packages
if you buy the ticket abroad and the Indonesian government is mounting
a campaign to encourage visitors to cash in on last month's devaluation.
  The currency change means that tourists can get 45 per cent more rupiah
to the dollar, slashing the cost of meals, drinks and local transport.
  Indonesia, the only Asian member of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting
Countries, has been badly hit by the fall in the price of oil and devalued
on September 12, setting a new rate to the dollar of 1035 rupiah against
734 previously.
  Though many of Indonesia's better hotels are priced in US dollars, tourists
looking for bargains will find accommodation at rock bottom prices.
  Indonesia is a country of 13,000 islands with a population of 165 million
people that is mostly Moslem, though on Bali - the most popular tourist
destination - a mixture of Hindu and Buddhist culture predominates.
  Straddling the equator, the volcanic chain is strung out across a distance
broader than the United States and includes a fascinating kaleidoscope of
different peoples from near Stone Age tribes in the far eastern province
of Irian Jaya and former head-hunters in Borneo to the matriarchal society
of part of Western Sumatra.
  It will soon be easier than ever to get to Bali.
  From next month Garuda will open new flights to the resort island from
Amsterdam, Taipei, Guam and Los Angeles, says Garuda chief R.A.J. Lumenta.
  Because of these plans, Lumenta told reporters there was now a critical
need to improve Bali's small airport.
  Japan is providing a 14.9 billion yen (A$150 million) loan for the expansion
project, but it is not expected to get underway until October next year,
according to Transport Minister Rusmin Nurjadin.
  In the meantime, visitors may find frustrating delays at Bali's Ngurah
Rai airport.
  But it is still worth the wait.
  Despite fears that an influx of tourists will wreck Bali's colourful
culture, it has thrived on the visitors who help keep alive its traditional
dancing, wood carving, textile making and active artists' colony.
  The glitter of neon between the palms along Kuta Beach may be seen as
an unwelcome intrusion of the modern world by some, but Bali authorities
have wisely restricted tourist development to the extreme southern tip of
the island.
  The newest resort will open in December, when President Suharto is expected
to inaugurate the latest Club Mediterranee complex at the luxury development
of Nusa Dua.  President Reagan stayed at a nearby hotel last April.
  Suharto has called for a concerted effort to promote tourism to make up
for lost oil dollars.
  "We must realise how important the role of tourism is in ensuring the
continuity of our development efforts," he told a tourism conference in
Jakarta.
  The government aims to increase tourist arrivals by 14 per cent a year
in the present five-year plan ending in 1989.  But visitors to the country
rose by only 2.8 per cent to 720,647 last year from 700,910 in 1984.
  This is partly because Indonesia is expensive to get to from many parts
of the world.  But tourists also complain of poor standards of hygiene
in some places, high prices, cheating and poor service.
  "The quality of Indonesian tourism in terms of promotion, service, price,
attractions and management still leaves much to be desired in view of the
high rate of complaints by tourists visiting Indonesia,"  Tourism minister
Achmad Tahir admitted last month.

