SUCCESS AND THE JONES BOY By Janise Beaumont THE MAN WHO TALKED THE GREEN AND GOLDS TO GLORY TALKS ABOUT HIS FAVOURITE SUBJECT  

  THERE'S a Frank Sinatra song that ends: "Here's to the winners all of us can
be."
  So tell that to the country's 650,000 unemployed you say? And to those who
are always unlucky in love?
  Alan Jones, the man who has motivated our Green and Golds to Rugby glory and
who leaves shortly to try to do the same for the Bond camp in Perth, agrees
with Sinatra.
  He adds: "The values required to succeed in one field of human endeavour are
exactly the same as those required to succeed in any other."
  After coming off air at 2UE, in his speedy and always-enthusiastic way, Jones
talked about what it takes to come out on top.
  "You have to understand your weaknesses and your strengths. Then be happy
with what you are and confident about what you MAY be and don't be deterred.
  "This is a country where we tend to be embarrassed about our potential and at
the moment we live in an incentive-less society. The permissive 60s gave us
permission to fail.
  "Not only that, but everyone wants to believe that winning's difficult - it's
not.
  "What's important is not to give up.
  "Joan Sutherland was a typist till she took a chance on going overseas.
  "And Sir Donald Bradman - I've just written a forward to a new book about him
- was smashing all the records while he was being told he couldn't do it.
  "We don't live in a country that cultivates success and in what I do I try to
break that down.
  "I say to players: `Do you want to be the best in the world? Well let me know
if you do - otherwise cheerio'.
  "Then I tell them: `You'll be vilified and your motives will be questioned
and it'll be hard work - but worth it'."
  True as God he doesn't stop for a second, and the effort of what he says and
the way he leans forward as though you're the only one in the world he wants to
pass his message onto - well, it's mesmerising.
  Makes a person want to rush out and join a softball team or build a better
mousetrap.
  And speaking of better and best consumer goods - Alan has a bone to pick
with Prime Minister Bob Hawke over his recent address to the nation.
  "He conujured up images of great and successful Australians and virtually
challenged us to strive to be like them. Then after he told us to be like
Sutherland and de Costella - in the next breath he told us to buy Australian,
even if it's second best."
  Back to the blueprint for winning:
  "In sport, as in everything else, if your values are wrong, your attitude is
wrong, your strategy is wrong and your preparation is wrong, then it's on the
scoreboard.
  "In life we don't keep the score unless it counts, do we?"
  On working with a team: "One incentive is the team itself," he said.
  Referring to the Wallabies: "We're mates, inextricably locked together. That
loyalty and mateship can move mountains.
  "At Eden Park we won because we're mates - that's an ingredient in success."
  And when the inevitable losses come: "I don't whinge when I lose - nobody
hears me make excuses."
  He agreed there has to be a period of mourning after any kind of loss ...
There's got to be room for sentiment.
  "When we lost at Canterbury we grieved and I don't care who knows it. Then
you come back with a greater commitment to regenerate and regroup."
  It seems we're never too young or too old to make use of these pholosophies.
  "The other day I said to a 19-year-old: `Do you want to be the best in the
world? - because I think you can be' - the bloke's stunned - `Well yes, as long
as you don't tell anybody'.
  "This bloke's life has been turned around forever.

