<subsample>
	<id> A11b </id>
	


	<source> Sydney Morning Herald - 6 March 1986 </source>
	
 

	<h> Ice-cool enigma gets a kick out of being a loner </h>
	


	<bl> By MICHAEL COCKERILL </bl>
	

Diplomacy has never been Marshall Soper's strong point.  Indeed the 25-year-old
multi-talented soccer player seems to have spent most of his career building
bridges only to happily knock them down again.
  Why a man with so much to play for has a history of self-destruction is
an enigma.  Among the people Soper has been associated with few can truly
claim to know what makes him tick.
  Many have tried, and failed.  Of all the coaches Soper has had since he
arrived on the national league scene with Apia Leichhardt in 1981 only Manfred
Schaefer, his current boss at Sydney Olympic, can boast a worthwhile
relationship.
  Yet Soper is not an offensive character.  He wishes no-one harm. Nor is
he preoccupied with criticising the game that has given him so much.
  But he is exasperating.  He is a loner.  He is confident to the point of
being headstrong.  And he has demonstrated on countless occasions that
he can be frustratingly unpredictable.
  For all his clashes with authority, however, Soper has few regrets. 
It is almost as if he wants to force whatever issue is at hand until it
reaches breaking point. Then he can enjoy the reaction.
 It is a style which often lands him in trouble, although Soper is comfortable
with that.  Controversy is a constant, almost reassuring, companion.
  That is why he is always building bridges.  And that is why his latest
reconstruction project leads him to the door of national coach Frank Arok.
  Arok has already forgiven Soper once.  When he ignored a curfew while
the Socceroos were preparing for a game against England in Brisbane in 1983
he was sent home.  Arok said then: &quot;If 17 players can stick to the rules
and not play up why should I tolerate one man doing as he likes?&quot;
  Even as he said it, however, Arok knew that with the 1985 qualifying rounds
of the World Cup approaching he could not ignore a player of such goal-scoring
talents.  Soper returned to the squad and to all observers it seemed a fait
accompli that he would spearhead the Socceroos' World Cup attack alongside
skipper John Kosmina.
  But Soper, the master of surprise revealed an ace up his sleeve just
days before the first World Cup qualifier against New Zealand in Auckland.
 Two years of training camps, preparation games and team talks went out
the window as he withdrew from the World Cup squad for &quot;personal reasons&quot;.
  Once again the thunderclouds descended on Soper's Raymond Terrace home.
 Once again he was centre stage as the drama unfolded around him.
  Even the most hardened Soper cynics found it hard to believe he could
throw away the chance of a lifetime for reasons which most other players in
the squad chose to ignore.  Sure, it was tough financially to go on the
road with the Socceroos but such sacrifices came with the job.
  SO AROK did what he had to do.  He got rid of Soper.  In came David Mitchell
and he performed so well that he has since landed a lucrative contract with
the German Bundesliga club Eintracht Frankfurt.  
  At one stage, midway through the campaign, Soper made noises to return
through the back door.  But it is no secret that had Arok relented he would
have had a players' revolt on his hands.
  So Soper, who would have been a key figure in what was a glorious, if
ultimately unsuccessful, campaign got his kicks only in front of the TV
set.  And for one of the few times in his life he regrets what happened.
  &quot;Looking back, I guess I should have stayed,&quot; he said.
  &quot;When I played my first game for the Socceroos (January 1983 v New Zealand
in Auckland) the thrill of pulling on that green-and-gold shirt was tremendous.
It was a great honour, and that made it very difficult to give up.
  &quot;I might not get another chance to play in the World Cup, and that is
hard to take.  I got wrapped up in the whole thing last year, but it was
painful to watch.
  &quot;Now I've got only one thing on my mind - to get back into the team. 
And I'd like to think that if I keep scoring goals then Frank (Arok) won't
be able to ignore me.
  &quot;As for the other players, I've got no apprehensions. A true player always
thinks the best players available should play in the team, and I think I'm
the most complete striker in the country.&quot;
  Soper has the credentials to back up his claims.  Since he left the
now-defunct Northern NSW State League club Stewart and Lloyds to join Apia
five seasons ago he has notched 65 goals, making him one of top 10 all-time
scorers in the national league. 
  IN THAT time he has had a number of clashes with his coaches, but his
form in front of goal has never waned. It even survived the most turbulent
period of his career, when he was involved in a running battle with Tommy
Docherty while the flamboyant Scotsman was at the helm of Olympic.
  &quot;I never liked him - simple as that,&quot; Soper said.  &quot; I thought he came
out here for a holiday.  He treated the game as a joke.  
  I didn't think it was right that someone who was getting so much from soccer
should behave that way.  He was always abusing me in the press, complaining
about my attitude and my playing style.  
  &quot;I was glad to see him go, but even during the worst times I kept scoring
goals.  He just couldn't afford to leave me out of the team.&quot;
  But goals were not the only reason Docherty would not dare to drop Soper.
 Since he joined Olympic three and a half seasons ago Soper has been elevated
to a God-like status by the club's fanatical Greek fans.
  He scores goals, he wins matches and he responds to their adulation. It
would take a brave, if not doomed, coach to take chances with The Man Who
Can Do No Wrong.                            
  &quot;I have a great relationship with the Olympic fans,&quot; he said.
  &quot;If I keep scoring goals like I have been, then they respond. When a couple
of thousand people start cheering my name it lifts my performance; it spurs
me on.  And I always like to entertain the crowd, to be a bit of a character.
  &quot;I'm also a cheeky sort of player.  I like to get the ball wide and take
on defenders.  Some people reckon I've got a short fuse, but even in the
middle of an incident I've got a cool head underneath.  I know what I'm
doing because most of the time I've been baiting the defender.  
  &quot;You've got to be confident in this game.  And I reckon I'm one of the
best.  That's why I never worry about the opposition; never respect too many
players.  I let them worry about me.&quot; 
  THAT Soper is blossoming into the well-finished article is also a compliment
to Schaefer.  He is the only coach since his mentor of his junior days,
former Everton forward, Mike Trebilcock, to gain his respect.
  &quot;I guess I can be a difficult player to manage, but with Manfred there
have been no problems at all,&quot; he said.
  &quot;The only way I can describe it is that we have a bond; that we just seem
to hit it off.&quot;  
  Whether the successful relationship keeps Soper at Olympic
until the end of his playing days is debatable.  Although the player enjoys
the club, and would love nothing more than to win the title with Olympic,
he is by nature nomadic.
  &quot;I'm happy with Olympic, but there comes a stage when a player should
move on,&quot;  he said.
  &quot;Call it boredom, but sometimes you need a change to rekindle your
enthusiasm.&quot;
  Where he will go after he completes his current one-year contract is anyone's
guess, but there will be no shortage of offers.
  And whether he plays for Olympic next season, or another Australian club,
is immaterial to Arok. If he is going to forgive and forget a second time
then all that matters is that Soper is close at hand.


</subsample>
