World News The PNG `big man' whom time passed by By a special correspondent Port Moresby, 17 Nov -  

`Action Man' is dead.  He failed in life, to fulfil his most desperate
ambition, to become Papua New Guinea's first Highland Prime Minister.  But
in death he has certainly made his mark on his country.
  Sir Iambakey Okuk, who was mourned yesterday with riots and the isolation
of the nation's capital, was a truly pugnacious son of the Highlands.
  Born 43 years ago in Pari village, Chimbu province, Sir Iambakey left
high school after three years and served an apprenticeship as a motor
mechanic.  He first stood for Parliament in the 1968 election, for the
Mount Hagen constituency where he was then working.  He came fourth.
 Despite the immense wave of Highland anguish over his premature death,
of liver cancer, he never achieved an overwhelming electoral response.
 He won an election back home in Chimbu in 1972, as a member of Sir Thomas
Kavali's National Party, which he soon took over.
  In 1977 he won again, securing the highest proportional vote of his career
- 22 per cent, still enough to secure victory in a first-past-the-post system.
  Sir Iambakey was unpredictable, ruthlessly ambitious, belligerent, and
had a surprising capacity to charm.
  His place in history will come (if for anything apart from his riotous
funeral) from his unselfconscious early stance for independence, opposing
the conservative Highlands trend which had seen most "big men" support the
planters'-based United Party for fear of being dominated by the better
educated coastal people.
  He was considered bolshie by the European establishment - and behaved
in manner to suit, especially when, after helping tip the delicate balance
after the 1972 election in Michael Somare's way, he was rewarded with the
transport portfolio.
  He did not last long, upsetting Cabinet solidarity too often and overturning
too many agreed policies.  He joined the Opposition, vowing to get his
ministry back, on his own terms.
  To achieve this, he moved obsessively for the jugular of 
old-time United Party leader Sir Tei Abal, who felt the Opposition's role 
at that time of independence should be to rally round the Government.
  It did not take Sir Iambakey long after the 1977 election to become leader
of the Opposition and he sought his next victim:  Mr Somare.
  After two failed no-confidence attempts, though, he was enough of a realist
to concede that another Opposition politician might stand a better chance
and supported Sir Julius Chan's winning push to become Prime Minister in
March 1980.  Sir Iambakey became deputy Prime Minister.
  Paias Wingti's achievement of becoming, aged only 34, the first Highland
Prime Minister must have particlarly upset Sir Iambakey, though he never
referred to it publicly. 
  Time, in a sense, had already passed by his particularly 
colorful brand of regionally based Highlands "big man" leadership. People 
were looking now for more sophistication, education and even consultation.  
But for many Highlanders he remained a symbol of their energetic and vibrant 
culture, the "Action Man" they now mourn.

