<sample>
	<id> A14 </id>
	

 
	<source> The Age - 20 May 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2013 words </note>
	


	<h> A Housewife's Lot </h>
	


	<misc>...is not an easy one.  In part two of a series on housework, Louise Carbines
looks at a day in the life of a full-time housewife and mother.  And inside,
the `stronger sex' reflects on the domestic front. </misc>
	

ANNE Lloyd Mackenzie belongs to a diminishing species, the stay-at-home
mother.  In Australia nowadays, only a third of children are looked after
at home by their mothers.  Anne is an advocate for a minority committed
to a lifestyle which traditionally has been regarded as an honorable fate.
  For Anne, being a mother is synonymous with being a teacher.  At home,
she looks after her son Cameron, 3, and 16-month-old twins Rob and Cathy.
 Her job is of inestimable value. If she were paid for her professional
training as a teacher, she would earn about $450 a week.
  She is sad that society pigeonholes motherhood as an important but
low-status job because the going rate for mothers is nothing.  A live-in
housekeeper could command about $400 a week.  A live-in nanny would cost
about $175 a week.  Even domestic help costs about $9 an hour.
  &quot;I'm sure that pay would raise society's regard for mothers,&quot; she says.
 &quot;I'd like to see people at home being paid a living wage and people at
work being taxed more heavily.  There's a lack of community responsibility
for families. I also really like the idea of a communal village, where people
could share responsibility for child care.&quot;
  At 6.30 am, Anne's reasons for staying at home have already woken up.
Dummy in her mouth, hair standing on end, Cathy waddles into the kitchen.
She rounds the table, teeters, then makes for her mother's navy dressing gown.
Safely behind it, she takes a wary interest in the strangers who have 
inexplicably appeared.
  Rob, her twin brother, arrives a few minutes later, trailing the bedclothes
behind him.  Barefoot, he plods up to the table, his brown security-blanket
sweeping the floor.  Often, he will thoughtfully bring Cathy a blanket
and lend her his dummy.  There is more love than rivalry between them. 
His father, Ian, swings him up into a high-chair, settling him in front
of breakfast. Soon, Rob's face is covered with Vegemite and the table with
milk and Weeties.
  Ian usually feeds the children breakfast.  He is often on call as a doctor,
but Anne is always on call as a mother.  If she is lucky, this family routine
lets her sleep until 7am.  But today she is up for the children's breakfast,
prepared to welcome us early so that we can spend a day with her at home.
  &quot;If you come that early, you'll probably find me in my dressing gown,&quot;
she had joked the day before.  The dressing gown, like hair-rollers, is
part of the caricature of the housewife, almost a symbol of a dull or dilatory
life.  If she is not dressed up she is not doing much, or she is doing a
lot of little consequence.  Good humoredly, Anne wears her dressing gown,
reads the paper and makes tea for her guests at the beginning of a long day.
Meanwhile, her children are turning the kitchen into a playroom.
  &quot;Robert, you will go head over toes,&quot; she says, watching him pull cake-tins
and a bread-board out of a cupboard.  He jumps up and down on them and grins.
Cathy joins him.  They bump into each other and fall on their bottoms.  &quot;See,&quot;
their mother laughs.  &quot;That's what you get for mucking around.&quot;
  Next, they help her with the dishes.  They push their chairs over to the
sink and wait for her to roll up their sleeves.  While an adult sees the
dishes, a child sees the bubbles.  They pat the bubbles, and fish for the
sponge in the sink.  Julius Sumner Miller would be proud of their wonder
and application as they squeeze water on to the bench and mop it up.
  &quot;I always think of it as a learning experience,&quot; Anne says, as she helps
her slow dishwashers down from their chairs. &quot;It's important to provide
them with an environment where they can explore.&quot;  At the moment, chores
are a game for them.  For Anne, they are the consequence rather than the
purpose of staying at home.
  &quot;People might not believe it, but I do like to have the house tidy.  However,
I think this is more important.
  &quot;When I was teaching, I often felt that I was fixing up other people's
mistakes.  I try to use a lot of the techniques that I used when I was
teaching.  Being education-oriented, I try to preserve their curiosity.
So many children seemed to have the curiosity barked out of them with
`Don't do that!'.&quot;
  Cam scooted into the kitchen.  He had told Anne that he didn't mind if
a photographer came to see him, but he didn't want to meet a reporter.
He met Sebbie, the photographer, who showed him his cameras.  &quot;Anne, what's
a journalist?&quot; he asked, as he sat down for breakfast.  The explanation
did not excite him.
  &quot;What are you eating?&quot; I asked, making small-talk.
  &quot;I was going to eat toast, but the babies finished it off.&quot;  Despite this,
he got on well with his babies, and had asked Anne if she would have &quot;just
one more lot&quot;.
  While Cam and Sebbie discussed the logistics of eating jellybeans on
toast, Anne talked about her children. &quot;Cam is very verbal.  He tends to
have passionate friendships with little girls he knows.  When he was young,
he would never let me leave him. I don't know how much of that was fear
from asthma.  He was admitted to hospital with asthma at 12 months.&quot;  This
morning, she would need to give him two air-pumps for his asthma. 
  &quot;Cathy really likes to play to a gallery.  But Rob is really affectionate
to people he knows.  He's very orderly.  He likes everything in its place.&quot;
  Wiping the sink, Anne thought carefully about her definition of a &quot;good
mother&quot;.  She was very conscious of how exacting society could be of the
women it did not pay.  &quot;I think that being a good mother is something to
do with letting children's personalities emerge to make the child a happy
person.  It's important to nurture their personalities so that they also
come to terms with the faults in their characters.  Being a good mother
is about civilising and socialising children.
  &quot;The most exciting thing is just watching their personalities develop,
to see that these inquiring little persons are learning from the way that
you have treated them.  You put so much work into them before they can speak
and walk and it's not until they are three of four that you can see the
results.  
  &quot;I think that being a mother is also very sensuous.  You're always being
touched and cuddled. You enjoy that intimacy.&quot;
  Anne, 31, had been brought up by a mother at home.  This had influenced
her decision to stay at home.  She wanted to be able to answer her children's
&quot;whys&quot;, even though, sometimes, they seemed like just more of the interminable
demands made on mothers.  &quot;I'm sure that someone who is just doing a job
would not have the same commitment to answering their questions.&quot;  She
was sure that mothers were also the best decoders of their children's early
speech, helping them make sentences from phrases, and phrases from words.
  &quot;Sebbie?  Will you come and watch `Playschool' with me?&quot; Cam asks.  It
is 9 am, and he and Sebbie disappear into the front room.  Already, Anne
has dressed her three children, hung a load of washing on the clothesline
and stopped to play with the trio on the jungle gym which, according to
Cam, offered the best view of Halley's comet in the back yard.
  &quot;Television really gives Cam a lot of ideas for things to do.  But the
standard really varies.  I did use it a lot as a baby-sitter. I suppose
I would think it was bad if Cam watched `Sesame Street' and `Playschool'
twice a day.  That would mean that he was watching three hours of television
a day.&quot;
  In the front room, Cam is leaning over the arm of a couch pushed close
to the television.  It is the best room in their house.  &quot;Sometimes people
tell me to keep him out of the front room, that we should have a room that
won't be damaged by the children.  I think that he should grow up in a house
that belongs to him.  It teaches him that he has responsibilities and
rights.  You can't do that if you're trying to keep the place tidy all the
time.&quot; 
  Anne and Ian bought their house in an eastern suburb about five years ago.
Anne says her house would never feature in `Home Beautiful', and she would
never fit the advertisers' ideal of the &quot;margarine mum&quot;. One day, she says,
they will get around to doing all the painting and the weeding which a
margarine mum would have done.
  &quot;I think that our spending priorities are quite atypical.  We spend very
little on clothes or the house.  The rest goes on help.  I think that money
is a real problem for many people with young families.  I'm very lucky.
I have someone who comes in at tea for two hours.  We agreed that I should
have help in lieu of the time that Ian couldn't give me.  
  &quot;We decided that Ian should go on to further study.  I suppose that I
lose seniority, but I don't lose my position.  I'd much rather see careers
compromised than the children compromised.  I think that a lot of people
would like to do more with their families, but careers just aren't structured
that way.&quot;
  She resents the times when people dismissed her because of her job.
They seemed to think that women at home lacked ambition or intelligence because
they were &quot;just housewives&quot;.
  Sometimes she feels trapped.  &quot;There are times when I'd just like to go
down to the library and get some books, but often you can't do that on the
spur of the moment.&quot;  She also regretted that becoming a parent meant that
she and Ian spent less time with friends who did not have children.  &quot;We've
really lost touch with a lot of people, a lot of friends.  You tend to go
and see people with children.  Usually we're headed to bed by 9.30pm.&quot;
  Last night, they had gone to bed about 11. Cathy woke at about 2am, and
Cam could not sleep because of his asthma.  The children finally settled
down at about 4am.  Everyone was up a couple of hours later.  &quot;I suppose
lack of sleep is the worst thing about motherhood,&quot; Anne says.  &quot;You can
put up with almost anything else.&quot;
  By 11 am, the twins are waddling around with their blankets, a sign that
they are ready for a sleep.  After hanging out another load of washing, making
the beds and giving Cam an air-pump, Anne picks up Cathy and Cam and reads
them stories in the back yard.  She reads `Elizabeth Anne' and `Amazing Trains
of the World'.  We learn that people in India like to travel on top of
trains as well as inside them.
  Under the clothesline, Cam climbs into a bus which, until a few minutes
ago, had been the family banana chair.  &quot;I can see London Bridge,&quot; he shouts.
 Naturally, he is the driver, and Sebbie is the porter who must load and
unload the bus.  There is a lot of luggage; a wheelbarrow, a mop, a bucket,
a rake, a kickboard and the babies' bath.
  Luckily for the porter, the bus driver has to go to kinder at 1pm.  He
rides his bicycle to kinder, ahead of the babies (in their stroller), Anne,
Sebbie and the journalist.  Before she picks him up at 3 pm, Anne goes home
again, does the lunch dishes and takes the twins shopping.  She buys them
a broom and umbrellas, blue and red.  Sweeping the footpath and testing
their umbrellas, the family arrives home again at 4pm.


</sample>
