For Arthur Ellis, it's time to quit By Terry Friel  

Leading Melbourne car dealer Arthur Ellis is quitting.
  And he's tipping as many as half of Melbourne's new car dealerships to
disappear within two years.
  The Ellis family Holden and Honda dealership will be auctioned on December
10 - a victim of the fringe benefits tax and the slump which has rocked
the new car market.
  New car registrations plunged almost 20 per cent nationally last month
as the industry continued to slip into its worst position in eight years.
  Mr Ellis said FBT was "the final straw" for his family's six-year-old
Heidelberg operation.
  And he predicted that the widely condemned tax would claim more victims
in the car industry.
  "There is no doubt in the world that anybody who is hovering will fall
(because of the tax)," he said.
  Mr Ellis said the new car market had fallen 25-30 per cent at the same
time interest rates had rocketed 50 per cent.
  The main reasons behind his move were the market slump, FBT and the amount 
of interest expressed in the dealership property.  "We haven't been pushed 
to the wall," he said.
  But Mr Ellis, who has been in the business 35 years, said the outlook
for the new car industry was grim.
  "I feel in the next couple of years it's going to go down," he said.
"Most of the dealers are having a hard time."
  Competition was fierce in the face of falling sales and profit margins
had been slashed.
  Mr Ellis said the Federal Government faced a huge groundswell reaction
against FBT.
  He will take a bus-load of protesters to an anti-FBT rally in the City
Square on Monday.
  Mr Ellis said the Government was cutting its own throat with FBT.  The
impact of the tax on business profitability would cut Government revenue
from other taxes, such as sales tax.
  He said he would help his staff find new jobs.  The industry slump had
already forced the Ellis operation to trim staff.
  Mr Ellis will stay on for a time to "tidy up". He has no definite plans
after that.                                                     

