<subsample>
	<id> A16d </id>
	


	<source> The Herald - 25-26 October 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h>1c upon a time, it made sense... </h>
	


	<misc> One cent.  It's not much.  Yet somehow it's even less than it used to be.
 BRUCE EVA took his solitary cent - not to mention high hopes and memories
- to Melbourne's shopkeepers. </misc>
	

WHAT does the South Melbourne Football Club, the dodo, the Tasmanian tiger 
and the $1 note all have in common?
  Extinction!
  Membership requirements for this exclusive club are very simple.  Don't
exist.
  It is not a popular club by any stretch of the imagination yet away in
the distance we have a new applicant looming.
  The one-cent piece.
  Yes, you remember it, the little copper piece you find lying in the street
that you are too scared to pick up in case someone is watching you. 
  Or the fiddly little thing you receive with your receipt when you have
just bought your first toaster for $49.99
  So the question has been raised.  Do we need the one-cent coin? 
  I mean, how long has it been since one could buy something for a cent,
or going further back, a penny?
  I remember the good old days in primary school, when if you found a one-cent
piece, you had two extra mates during lunchtime.  The reason?  Three jellybeans
for a cent.
  Nowadays for all the big spenders we have the one-cent stamp and for
all you miserly hackers out there chopping up our public and private courses
you can buy a single, plastic, colored golf tee for a cent.
  And if you're hungry while out on the course then you can splurge on a
single lolly for a cent although it might taking some hunting around to
find shops that still sell them.
  Yet someone else must be able to make use of this sometimes meaningless
little thing.
  The government!
  Not buying anything on your Bankcard does not save you from our beloved
money collectors.
  You will still be charged one-cent for something they term Financial
Institutions Duty.  Hmmm!
  Governments, golfers, postage and lollies aside you are pushed to find
anything you can buy with it.
  A single button is now around five cents.  You can only buy small nails
or tacks pre-packed (the few exceptions where you can buy them separately
all smash through the one-cent ceiling).  If you want to weigh yourself
on public scales you can fork out anything up to five cents.
  So what are the cheapest goods you an buy these days?
  A pair of shoe laces are 35 cents, a box of tissues for 30 cents and a
potato cake about 20 cents.  Chocolates go by weight but if you want one
milk pastille you part with four cents.
  Paper clips, rubber bands, straws and matches all come in packets, although
singly they would be around one cent.
  The one-cent coin and the penny were much more useful 10, 20 or 30 years
ago.  
  The last generation recollect two licorice blocks for a penny, a one
penny bag of lollies and a cream-between (a slab of vanilla ice-cream between
two wafers) for two pennies - all the rage in the Fifties.
  Going further back, our cherished Footy Record (now 70 cents) was one
penny when first published in 1912 and only 10 cents when we went decimal
in 1966.
  But back to the question in hand.  Is there any real sense in keeping
it in circulation?
  The majority of shop owners I spoke to said no, although the milk bar
proprietors said that it came in handy for change from cigarettes and other
small items.  Not so handy when the change builds up and weighs down the
pockets.
  The principal use for it these days is to give one back to a person, almost
as a token gesture, after they have bought something for $XX.99.
  But wouldn't it be easier if all people selling merchandise stopped kidding
themselves that they are kidding us into believing that we are making a
huge saving if we buy something that is $9.99 instead of $10.  
  So as long as the mint keeps churning them out, then people will keep 
losing them, cursing them, collecting them or even on the odd occasion, 
buying something with them.
  Yet if we get rid of them where will we stop? Big brother (the two-cent
piece) is also about as useful as a hole in the head and therefore could
we soon see the day where the five, or even the 10-cent piece is the lowest
denomination.
  I'll leave you to ponder that as I must go and pay my Bankcard bill of
one cent.
  I wouldn't want a &quot;PLEASE PAY UP, SECOND AND FINAL NOTICE&quot; letter, now
would I?


</subsample>
