Herald spells out growth strategy  

THE Herald and Weekly Times Ltd strategy of increasing assets through major
acquisitions will help future growth, directors said in the latest annual
report released yesterday.
  "We consider the 1985-86 period a year of change and consolidation,"
the directors said.
  The report said plans to organise the HWT publishing network into a national
system were well advanced, and will provide exposure for advertisers in
any of the group's 142 papers. 
  "Australia's $3.3 billion annual advertising expenditure progressively
is being controlled by fewer people," directors said.
  "The advent of retail giants such as Coles Myer, Woolworths-Safeway gives
the HWT an exciting opportunity to benefit through its unique national
spread," directors said.
  The annual report said developing a national network concept, which
will also embrace overseas bureaus, builds a higher company profile and
more efficient use of journalists and technical resources.
  Despite a general downward trend in metropolitan newspaper circulation
which directors attribute to  changes in living and readership habits,
the HWT aggressively expanded its print activities.
  "We strongly believe in the future of newspapers and plans are in place
for further expansion," directors said.
  Through the acquisition of regional and suburban papers, HWT established
itself for the first time as a publisher in NSW.
  The strengthening of The HWT's print media activities is seen by market
analysts as consolidation of a profitable area of the group's operations.
  Directors said HWT consolidated profit, which accounted on a conventional
basis fell 4.4 per cent, was severely cut back by interest payments on
increased borrowings.
  Profit from trading and investment was 4.37 per cent less than last year,
in what directors described as a period of political and economic uncertainty.
  Directors described trading results as disappointing but they said some
recovery was evident in the second half of the year.

