Hooker: Larger market and higher profit in US SYDNEY  

- Mr George Herscu's Hooker Corp. Ltd yesterday blasted "anti-business"
Federal Government policies and blamed them for forcing the company to
expand overseas.
  Hooker executive director Mr Paul Carter, in a speech read at the annual
meeting by company secretary Mr Harry Berkovic, said the US offered the
company a larger market where it could achieve higher profit.
  Mr Carter's criticism follows similar attacks this week on the Federal
Government's economic policies by Industrial Equity Ltd's Mr Ron Brierley
and Coles Myer chairman Mr Bevan Bradbury.
  Mr Carter said in addition to the capital gains tax and fringe benefits
tax, which were disincentives to investment, the Federal Government was
adding imputation tax and the foreign tax credit system, all levied at the
"exceedingly high" rate of 49 per cent.
 "Unfortunately, the aggregate effect has forced Hooker to direct further
investment offshore," he said  "In striving to maximise its return on shareholders' funds, Hooker is
obliged to consider this climate as it adjusts its policies for 1987 and
beyond.
  "An increasing proportion of profit will come from our US operations,
where substantially lower interest rates and tax burdens allow Hooker to
achieve a reasonable return on investment.
  "We will continue to grow in Australia, but the rate offshore will be
significantly greater."
  Mr Carter said Hooker hoped the high interest rates, taxes and increased
business costs would fall.
  "But the rigid wage determination system. the tough work conditions imposed
by union leaders and the apparent anti-business attitude of the Government
make this unlikely," he said. 
  Hooker's growing overseas involvement was not solely a reaction to the
economic climate in Australia, but was part of a conscious fundamental
policy of minimising risk through geographic diversification.
  The executive chairman, Mr Herscu, told the meeting that US assets had
increased to 32 per cent from 28 per cent, and US profit had doubled to exceed
$20 million for the first time.

