Leaf shedding an odd characteristic  

J.M. of BUNDABERG, has young leopard trees growing on a property.
  About one-third dropped their old leaves and quickly made new growth,
now the new leaves are falling.  Why didn't the rest of the trees shed their
leaves?
  This is an odd characteristic of leopard trees.  I have seen trees shed
their leaves three times in a year, sometimes within six weeks of new growth.
  The reasons are obscure - it is probably tied in with temperature changes
or some other climatic factor.

M.J.R. of SUNNYBANK HILLS, submitted for diagnosis a disease troubling
the skin of a bisexual papaw which was badly scarred.  The leaves have
shrivelled.  Lime Sulphur spray has been used.
  The damage is the result of a powdery mildew fungus infection.  Lime sulphur,
if used as regularly as stated, should have controlled the disease.  Powdery
mildew is a winter disease.  In future use only wettable sulphur sprays
as lime sulphur can damage plants under the local warm growing conditions.

N.B. of MOOROOKA, asked why lima bean leaves were yellowing and falling.
  Sight unseen it is difficult to diagnose accurately.  It could be
overwatering, however I would expect the vines also to be affected and
begin to collapse.

V.P.F. of PALM BEACH, is concerned by the lack of worms in the garden
despite using compost.  The site has been filled with sand.
  No matter how much compost or other organic matter is used, the only way
to ensure worms is to put some into the soil.  They will quickly multiply
if the organic matter is there to support them.  Try to obtain some from
someone else's garden or buy some from a commercial worm farm.  Sonwise
Worms, Box 68, Esk 4312 sell worms at $17 per 1000, postage paid.  By the
end of one year they should have multiplied to at least 40,000, if soil
conditions suit.

H.McF, of ISLE OF CAPRI, recently visited Toowoomba gardens where three
plants attracted attention: (1) a white flowering shrub, (2) a yellow to
orange-flowered annual, (3) a plant called blue pacific.  Samples of 1 
and 2 were submitted. 
  (1) is double white may, Spiraea cantonensis flore plene, often called C.
reevesiana.  (2) is Californian poppy, Eschscholzia californica, extremely
useful for trailing over terrace walls.  It must be grown in full sun and
have good soil drainage.  (3) I suggest blue pacific may apply to a deep
blue flowered form of Rosmarinus officinalis, the rosemary.
  To improve your soil, incorporate copious amounts of leaf compost and
use light applications of a complete fertilizer formula frequently.  This
should be standard procedure for all pump-filled areas which have been topped
with a thin layer of soil.
G.H. of TARINGA, has two problems with garden plants.  A Eugenia has pockmarked
foliage and potted ferns and coleus are slowly dying.  The soil in the pots
is heavily infested by small ant-like insects.
  The Eugenia Australis, or as it is now known Syzygium australis, scrub
cherry or lillipilli, is troubled by a small wasp which stings the leaf to
lay eggs.  Small galls and depressions result.  The species in question
is rather prone to attack, I doubt if much can be done to control it.  You
could try spraying young foliage with Diazinon.  You may have ants in the
pots, they farm out root aphids and mealy bugs on the root systems.  These
pests quickly debilitate the plants, also the tunnelling by the ants causes
excess aeration which in turn dries up the root hairs.
This action alone can kill plants.  Water the soil with a solution of Diazonin
at spray strength.  This will dispel the offender, even if it is not an 
ant.

L.P. of MARYBOROUGH, sent foliage of a tomato bush which was curled, distorted
and had a rusty and silvery sheen.
  The condition is due to mite damage.  Dispose of all badly affected plants
in future.  Spray young plants regularly with a miticide, such as Kelthane,
Rogor or Wettable Sulphur.

M.A. of CLEVELAND, has noted two plants in a batch of 50 gerberas are producing
green flowers.  On one plant the flower is partially deformed.
  The condition is most likely due to infection by a virus, for which there
is no cure.  Remove the problem plants and dispose of them in the garbage
bin.  Spray the rest regularly with an insecticide to control sap sucking
insects, such as aphids and thrips, as these carry the virus.

J.A. of BURLEIGH, asks for recommendations for two plants suitable for
growing in tubs on a balcony facing the sea.
  The best plant I know for such a position is the variegated form of
Metrosideros excelsa or New Zealand Christmas bush.  Clip twice a year
to keep it compact, and give the tub a quarter turn each month so light
does not unbalance growth.  This should ensure you have good plants.  A
matching pair is advised.

FREQUENTLY readers request advice on how to establish a good lawn.
  At this time of the year many new lawns are laid down.  Quite a number
will end up looking very ordinary, simply because the approach to laying
the turf was:  "It will be OK, it's only grass."  If the laying techniques
are slipshod it may take years to get the lawn to a good standard
  The area to receive the turf should be level in accord with the natural
fall of the land.  A thin layer of fine sand is spread evenly over the site
to enable the roots to bed in.  Each row of turf is closely butted against
the other, and fine sand placed in any crevices.  Each row is firmed down
with the back of a spade or tamper.
  The newly-laid turf must be well watered and kept evenly moistened until
it has established.  Mowing is not advised sooner than three weeks after
laying, as it could cause lifting.
  The first mowing should be higher than normally acceptable, just to tidy
up the growth.  Mowing settings are progressively reduced until the turf
has reached the height suitable for sound management and good presentation.

