<subsample>
	<id> A24b </id>
	


	<source> The Daily Sun - 25 November 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Ceremony marks message </h>
	

THE world needed people prepared to sacrifice themselves for others, rather
than sacrifice others for a cause, His Holiness Pope John Paul II told the
nation's leaders last night before lighting a candle for peace.
  In the strongest and most topical of his three speeches since arriving
in Australia, the Pope stressed the theme of his visit - peace in the world
- and asserted the dignity and rights of individuals.
  He commended Australia for being a tolerant and pluralistic society but
warned:  &quot;Justified pluralism is not to be confused with neutrality on human
values.
  In a heavily political speech, he called for &quot;appropriate disarmament&quot;,
made a strong reference to the value of a separate Catholic education system
and delivered a broad hint on abortion.
  Speaking in Kings Hall at Parliament House for a special peace ceremony,
Pope John Paul II called on politicians to guard the right to religious freedom
and the dignity of the human person.
  &quot;As you know, the principle of the inviolable dignity of all human beings
is an even higher principle in a democratic State than majority opinion.
  &quot;Indeed, all democracies will eventually succeed or fail to the extent
that they truly guard and promote the human rights of all, including
minorities.&quot;  
  The Pope said the number of Catholics in Australia and their presence
in almost all areas of Australian life were an example of how religious
freedom, fundamental among freedoms, was respected here.
  &quot;I pray that you will always ... be ever vigilant in defending the very
foundation of this right and every human right which is and will for ever
be the dignity of the human  person,&quot; he said.
  The challenge*challege was immense, His Holiness said, to promote a just society
to defend the weak and vulnerable, to eliminate racism and other
discrimination, to protect and assist the family, to find work for the
unemployed and to help all those in need.
  Australia had in the past been generous to the less fortunate of the world,
had taken a great influx of immigrants and accepted refugees, he said.
  The Pope touched briefly on one of the most contentious issues facing
Australian society, and Catholicism in particular - fertility control -
saying the only strong bases for civilisation were reverence for human life
from the moment of conception and through every stage of life.
  He said he hoped all Catholics and all other citizens would ensure that
nothing would be done by the legislature that would undermine those rights
and values.
  At the very foundation of peace were the two areas of defence of human
rights and efforts for the development of peoples.
  &quot;As long as these elements are missing at any level, peace is imperfect
and world peace is imperilled,&quot; the Pope said.
  His Holiness then lit a two metre-high Candle of Peace in Kings Hall and
offered a prayer for peace.
  The Parliament House reception was the final event in a hectic day in
which the Pope had flown from New Zealand, celebrated Mass for more than
100,000 people at the National Exhibition Centre in Canberra and met
Governor-General Sir Ninian Stephen and Lady Stephen at Government House.


</subsample>
