Warning on PIN code safeguards By Deirdre Williams  

  A warning that bank customers should not keep their PIN code to automatic
teller machines with their cash card has been issued by Consuming Interest,
the quarterly journal of the Australian Consumers Association.
  It seems about 50 percent of customers keep their code number, often
disguised as a telephone number, with their card.
  The publication said banks might consider this practice to be a breach
of conditions of use.  The customer could be left liable for unauthorised
use of the card.
  Difficulties with security of PINs (personal identification numbers)
was just one of the problems related to electronic funds transfer systems,
which were highlighted in a recent ACA survey.
  The survey showed that many consumers had suffered financial loss or
inconvenience due to EFTS.
  Other problems included errors and account statement inaccuracies; "phantom"
or unauthorised transactions; outright fraud; and mistakes in the amount
of cash disbursed from electronic terminals.
  Consuming Interest described cases where consumers had found their
accounts debited twice for the same purchase, or discovered transactions
caused by someone else being issued with an identical card.
  One consumer had two separate withdrawal transactions for $100 disrupted
with no money received, but the account was debited for the $200 and it
took six months and a written complaint to get the account rectified.
  Other cases involved excessively delayed transfer of funds, with one
person's wages remaining inaccessible for six weeks.
  "These problems result from accounting procedures whereby transaction
requests are recorded without verification that the cash was dispensed,
or the account credited," the magazine said.
  It said the system appeared designed to protect the financial institution
- while the consumer bore the risks.
  The Australian Consumer Association has called on the Federal Government
to make urgent reforms.
  The association wants legislation to ensure uniform codes of practice
and rights and responsibilities of all parties clearly specified; better
advice to consumers on methods of securing the PIN code, with all consumer
liability or losses ending automatically once the card has been reported
lost or stolen; and a formal system of investigating errors.
  The association also is pressing for the establishment of a tribunal
to resolve any disputes.

