Markets react calmly to record deficit CANBERRA - 

 A record current account deficit for October highlights the
pressure on the Federal Government's strategy to slow down the economy without
creating a full recession.
  With a deficit of $1735m, Australia continued to suck in more than $3000
worth of imports in October despite a 12 p.c. drop on the September figure.
  But, while the Opposition said the result was a disgrace, the financial
markets reacted calmly with the dollar and interest rates remaining steady.
  The Opposition Leader, Mr Howard, said the result proved the Government's
economic policies had failed miserably.
  But the Treasurer, Mr Keating, told Parliament the figure was "in the
groove" with Budget expectations.
  The October result showed that while the overall deficit rose $262m on
the September figure, Australia's trading position improved dramatically
in seasonally adjusted terms.
  The deficit on the balance of merchandised trade increased by $185m to
$253m, with regular imports continuing the downward trend that has been
evident in the economy since late last year.
  Government sources said they were more than happy with the deficit because
it was at the "very bottom of everybody's expectations".
  The trade account "should come back, but there won't be any dramatic
progress". 
  The Government's sails are set for early next year when it expects the
current account to pick up and start to move towards a trade surplus.
  Yesterday's figures were influenced by a number of adverse factors, including
the importation of $139m worth of aircraft parts by Qantas, Australian Airlines
and Ansett.
  Other seasonal difficulties included massive interest payments from
the public and private sectors and the quarterly foreign aid payments, and
the seasonal trade movements which work against any upturn in exports against
imports.
  Government sources say that with the regular imports - those not including
one-off items such as defence materials, aircaft and fuel - falling, there
is now growing evidence that Australian industry is engaging in import
replacement.  
  However, the Opposition has charged that Mr Keating had said
12 months ago that the trade deficit would begin to improve and this had
not happened.
  "There is not one individual, not one family, not one business that can
now possibly say that they feel they are better off under Hawke Government
than they were 3 1/2 years ago," Mr Howard said.
  He said Australia did not need a recession to stop the inflow of imports.
 Instead investment needed to be encouraged.
  "The great failure of the Government's economic strategy is that it believes
that all you have to do in order to encourage people to invest in exports
or manufacturing is to take advantage of the price benefits of a
depreciation," he said.
  "Yet in reality the things that will make people invest are lower taxes
and lower interest rates."
  Mr Keating said the October figures had caused hardly a flicker on the
Reuter screens which show the movements in the value of the Australian dollar.
  The dollar closed yesterday at US64.58c, the same as it closed on Wednesday,
and the trade weighted index, where the dollar is measured against a basket
of currencies, finished slightly stronger at 54.1.

