<subsample>
	<id> A26c </id>
	


	<source> The Adelaide Advertiser - 14 November 1986 </source>
	
 

	<h> Police group wants unions to join push for changes to Act </h>
	

  The SA Police Association will invite other unions - covering prisons,
fire and ambulance services - to make a joint approach to the State Government
to amend the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act.
  The association has already met the Deputy Premier, Mr Hopgood, on the
matter but has not received an official response.
  The action has arisen following the decision by the Attorney-General,
Mr Sumner, to use the $10,000 compensation awarded to an injured Whyalla
policeman to pay part of his $13,000 medical bill.
  Constable Adrian Burnett was shot in the face during a siege in January.
  Fragments of the .22 calibre bullet shattered his front teeth and palate
and eventually lodged in his throat near his spine.
  He underwent operations and more than six months of rehabilitation before
being able to return to work.
  The Police Assocation has been incensed by Mr Sumner's action.
  The secretary of the association, Mr Dan Brophy, said the committee of
SAPA had met and decided to use every possible legal avenue to clear up the
Act and its interpretation.
  He said he knew of three cases where police officers had been injured
in the line of duty and had not been awarded compensation under the Act.
  At present the Attorney-General has discretionary powers to channel
compensation payment made under the Act towards the payment of costs such
as medical bills.
  A spokesman for the Attorney-General's office said the purpose of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act was to provide compensation only where
there was no other compensation available.
  He said Const. Burnett had received payments from worker's compensation
and payments under the Act were only to be used as a last resort.
  In a Letter to the Editor in yesterday's Advertiser, the wife of another
police officer revealed her husband had also been denied the proper
compensation.  
  Her husband, Detective Sergeant Graem Lawton of the Elizabeth CIB, lost
more than 90 p.c. of the vision of his left eye in 1981 after a glass was
thrust into his face while working for the drug squad.
  The Attorney-General's spokesman said Det.-Sgt Lawton was not eligible
for compensation under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act but was eligible
for a lump sum payment under the Worker's Compensation Act for his permanent
disability.
 Under the Act, the loser of an eye is entitled to $10,000 but no such
application had been received from Det.-Sgt Lawton.
  Det.-Sgt Lawton said yesterday that it was his understanding that if
he took the lump sum payment he would not be eligible for any further payments
if his sight deteriorated.
  He said public servants were being discriminated against as payments of
up to $10,000 were not unusual for rape victims and relatives of murder
victims.
  Between January 4, 1986, and November 4, 1986, there had been 225 payouts
from the Criminal Injury Compensation Act totalling $1,007,952.53.


</subsample>
