Ombudsman criticises Minister CANBERRA -  

 The Commonwealth Ombudsman has attacked the Minister for Finance,
Senator Walsh, the Federal Government and Parliament for threatening his
effectiveness.
  Mr G. Kolts, QC, says in his 1985-86 annual report that an insidious threat
to the implementation of Ombudsman's recommendations tentatively identified
last year "gained serious substance in 1985-86."
  He says Senator Walsh's frequent rejection of recommended compensation
payments poses a substantial threat to his ability to provide meaningful
remedies for complainants financially disadvantaged by defective
administration.
  He also says some of his functions will be neglected and it will be a
"struggle for the Ombudsman to hold his own" unless staffing in his office
is increased.
  And he says the trend of Parliament to take no action on special Ombudsman
reports to it also threatens his effectiveness.
  Mr Kolts says that during 1985-86 there was an unprecedented number of
cases in which he had to report to the Prime Minister, Mr Hawke, because
a Government agency had not given effect to a recommendation from him.
  "With two exceptions, the stumbling block has been the refusal of the
Minister for Finance to approve an act of grace payment to the complainant,"
he says.
  Mr Kolts says that in refusing the payments, Senator Walsh opposed
recommendations of both the Ombudsman and the agency responsible for the
administrative defect.
  He says that a special Ombudsman's report to Parliament has hitherto
seemed to be an effective deterrent to arbitrary or ill-considered rejections
of his recommendations.
  But it is unlikely the reports will long continue to be such a deterrent
"if Parliament omits to take any constructive interest in them".
  Mr Kolts says neither of his two reports to Parliament during the year
elicited any debate or substantive comment despite the fact that both
raised issues of public interest.
  He says that in 1985-86 his office received 3750 written complaints -
400 more than the previous year - and more than 17,000 oral complaints 
- Paul Willoughby                                                     

