Black ban could kill Cwlth, says Hayden  CANBERRA:  

  The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Hayden, said yesterday that
the Commonwealth might collapse unless Britain took some tough action against
South Africa.
  Mr Hayden told the Channel Nine programme "Sunday" that many Commonwealth
countries, including Australia, were worried by the split between Britain
and the African Commonwealth countries over economic sanctions.
  He said there was a strong chance that the boycott of the Edinburgh
Commonwealth Games by four African nations could point to a further breakdown
in Commonwealth relations.
  "I think that the risk is very real and very large," he said.
  "There is a fear that the Commonwealth could unravel badly if Britain
fails to respond to the expectations of black Africa that there should be
action against South Africa."
  Mr Hayden said that the Commonwealth would be seriously depleted if the
African countries left.  They made up the bulk of the membership.
  He said that the question of how badly the Commonwealth would unravel
would be answered soon.
  Australia and Canada had provided international leadership on the issue
of sanctions, Mr Hayden said.
  The Cabinet had explored a "comprehensive range" of possible measures.
  But it had been left to the Prime Minister, Mr Hawke, to decide what
sanctions should be applied.
  His decision would take into account the views of other Commonwealth
countries at a meeting in August.
  Mr Hayden said that Australia did not want to knock itself out of the debate
on South Africa by applying a wide range of sanctions and then finding
that it had nothing left to contribute.
  At the same time Australia had to lead the debate towards a "fairly extensive
set of sanctions."
  Though he stressed that it was a personal view, Mr Hayden said he was
not convinced that the visit to South Africa by the British Foreign Secretary,
Sir Geoffrey Howe, would be fruitful.
  "I think that they are going to find it very difficult," he said.          
  So the issue comes back into everyone's lap, and in particular Britain's."

