<subsample>
	<id> A30b </id>
	


	<source> The West Australian - 17 May 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Rushing down the road to Mandalay </h>
	

Tourists are allowed only seven days in Burma. T.R. LANSNER tells how he made
the most of his one-week visit to this mysterious and colourful land.

DAWN on the Irrawaddy:  Pink patches colour grey-shaded clouds obscuring
the eastern horizon.  The dark line of the riverbank below takes on a more
solid substance and the black expanse of night sky softens towards blue.
  A riverside pagoda stands in elegant silhouette against the paling sky
as our steamer manoeuvres close in to shore.  A few large-wheeled bullock
carts are drawn up by a tiny jetty at this obscure stop on the daily run
downriver from Mandalay to Pagan in upper Burma.
  Few foreigners take these leisurely cruises down the wide, mighty and
muddy Irrawaddy.  Burma allows tourists a maximum seven days' stay - fly
in, fly out, and no extensions considered.  Most visitors try to cover as
much territory as possible in that time, packing a month's worth of pagodas, 
markets, hill resorts, arts, crafts and cultural shows into a hectic week which
eventually leaves them nearly comatose with exhaustion in the Rangoon Airport
departure lounge.
  A trip down the Irrawaddy means missing some other beautiful or fascinating
place, but with the short glimpse of the country permitted by Burmese
authorities, such choices must be made.
  The journey begins at Rangoon Airport, where you are immediately introduced
to official Burma, and very shortly thereafter, to unofficial Burma.  A
thick sheaf of customs forms must be completed in detailed duplicate.
  Cameras, watches, cash and jewellery are listed on several forms duly
inspected and stamped by unhurried bureaucrats.  The process can take an
hour or more, and you feel heartily sick of officialdom when you step from
the customs hall straight into the waiting grasp of the black marketeers.
  &quot;What do you sell?&quot; is their greeting, &quot;I buy your whisky, what price?&quot;
  Burma boasts a strict socialist economy which has driven the resource-rich
country to the brink of ruin.  The great fuss over filling in customs forms
is necessary because few consumer goods are legally imported, though the
demand is great.  Into the gap step entrepreneurs who will buy virtually
anything foreign, from whisky to cigarettes to walkman*walkmen radios, perfumes
and pornography, for resale in the local markets.
  Nearly every tourist arriving in Burma carries a bottle of Johnny Walker
Red Label whisky and a carton of cigarettes to sell on arrival for a fistful
of kyat, the Burmese currency.  Some shoestring travellers scruff by on
as little as $US 40 for the week, and for a bit more you can live quite
well.
  Just south of Mandalay, I found a festival under way.  Merchants,
restaurateurs, and fortune-tellers had set up shop, and by their raucous
behaviour many young men seem dedicated more to imbibing good spirits
than honouring them.  A circus and a freak show offered diversion under
an immense canvas tent, and a rudimentary carnival drew a fair crowd.
  Its prime attraction was a primitive ferris wheel.  It was &quot;powered&quot; by
a gang of about 15 nimble young men who clambered with monkey-like agility
to the top of the wheel while it was held fast below.  When those on the
ground released it with a great shove, the weight of the climbers propelled
the ferris wheel through its initial revolution.  With finely-timed leaps
to the ground, they deserted their precarious perches as the wheel and its
riders continued to spin above them.
  Much of what is often described as Burma's &quot;charm&quot; is its peoples' ability
to make do with limited modern material resources.  From a man-powered ferris
wheel to the 1950s vintage cars which potter about Rangoon's boulevards,
it is a country which seems to be caught in a time warp, left at a less
complicated and less frenetic level of existence.
  For the tourist able to take in only seven days of wonders, the relative
difference in pace is even more striking.  Places where you could easily
spend days are seen in hours, and many spots must simply be left unseen.
  But unless the recurrent 20-year-old rumours that the Burmese will &quot;soon&quot;
allow longer visits miraculously come true, tourists will have to be satisfied,
if not satiated, with their one week excursion to a land which merits much
longer exploration.          


</subsample>
