<subsample>
	<id> A32a </id>
	


	<source> The Mercury - 16 September 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Conflict in the air at Leningrad's perfumery </h>
	


	<bl> By Norm Sanders </bl>
	

  SENATOR Norm Sanders continues his reports on his tour of the Soviet Union
and Poland with an Australian parliamentary delegation.
LENINGRAD. - We were exhausted by the time we got back to the hotel at 8.30pm.
  Our day had started that morning with the Gromyko meeting in Moscow. 
It seemed like a week ago.
  We reassembled in the hotel dining room for dinner.  
  The restaurant was modern and well patronised, in contrast to the Moscow
hotel's grandiose emptiness.  A small band played ideologically sound rock
while we organised ourselves at our table.
  A stream of male waiters brought in the food.  We were never served by
females in the Soviet Union, which is a pity because the waiters universally
suffered from underarm odour.
  Knowing how much to eat of course at a formal dinner is hard enough at
home.  In a new country, it's almost impossible.
  At first in the Soviet Union I made the mistake of loading up on the
extremely substantial preliminaries: smoked sturgeon, cold cuts of meat,
tomatoes, and sometimes two soups. (There were also loads of cucumbers,
which are my pet aversion).
  Then, feeling quite sated already, I had to face perspiring waiters carrying
prodigious main courses of steak, veal, or chicken and potatoes.
  Any crannies left after this lot were subsequently filled with ice cream.
  Our only beverages were the ubiquitous mineral water, tea and coffee.
 Never a trace of alcohol touched our lips.
  I got up at 6 o'clock the next morning, determined to walk off all the
excesses of the previous evening.
  I noticed, gratefully, that the car and bus drivers were very polite to
pedestrians.
  At one stage I was crossing a side street when a bus turned off the main
thoroughfare and headed right at me.
  In Australia I would have had to dash for my life.
  In Leningrad, the driver stopped, smiled and motioned me in front of him.
  Little courtesies such as this impress tourists - a lesson some Tasmanian
drivers have yet to learn.
  Like Moscow, the main streets in Leningrad are wide and tree-lined.
  Every few hundred metres there are bulletin boards where Pravda and the
other newspapers are plastered for those who don't wish to spend the few
kopeks to buy their own.
  It was here that I encountered my first graffiti:  Someone had scrawled
&quot;Don't work!&quot; in Russian in large letters across the front page of Pravda.
  This must be the supreme sacrilege in a society which glorifies the value
of labour.  A little further on, a peace symbol had been chalked on a wall.
  I later asked Big Igor Saprykin about the graffiti's significance.
  &quot;Hooligans!&quot; he snorted, &quot;It is of no importance.&quot;  He seemed annoyed.
 Whether at the graffiti or at me noticing it, I couldn't tell.
  I showered and joined the others for our 8am breakfast.
  Our entire itinerary was laid out with military precision, down to 24-hour
time notation.
  Our last item on today's schedule was supper at 2245, after a dozen
engagements.
  Breakfast, like all the other meals, was a massive production:  Cold meats,
fish, cheese and yoghurt, followed by cool toast in the English tradition.
 Then came fried eggs or blintzes (pancake filled with cottage cheese)
which were delicious.
  These bountiful meals didn't come cheaply.  The Soviets footed the bill
for the delegation, but spouses were charged $70 per day for food.  We paid
these charges, along with spouses's air fares, out of our own pockets.
  By 9am we were at the Piskarevskoye Memorial Cemetery for a wreath-laying
ceremony.
  During the siege, bodies had to be buried in mass graves.  A total of
640,000 men, women and children lay here in an area of some five hectares.
  The cemetery is comprised of a series of low grassy mounds the size of
a tennis court.  Each mound holds 30,000 bodies.
  I wrote, &quot;We must never have another war,&quot; in the visitors' book.
  On the way back to the cars, I reflected on the 20,000,000 Soviet war
dead with Ambassador Ted Pocock.  He grumbled, &quot;Stalin killed 20,000,000
and the Russians don't build monuments to them.&quot;
  I suppose he had a point, but I was weary with death and didn't want to
get into an argument at that moment over whether Hitler or Stalin was the
most brutal tyrant.
  We were next shunted to the Aurora Borealis perfumery where we were met
by a smiling Mr Y.A. Aleksandrovich, a tall, fair-haired man with glasses,
who told us about his factory.
  The perfumery started in 1860 under the name of the &quot;St Petersburg Chemical
Laboratory.&quot;
  Today, the perfumery has over a thousand workers and supplies perfumes
and colognes for the Soviet Union and the export market.
  While we talked, a stylish blonde woman who was responsible for new products
handed out strips of cardboard with different scents for us to try.
  Mr Aleksandrovich talked of his factory's constant search for new
fragrances.  I mentioned Tasmania's essential oils industry which I vaguely
remembered from a story I did once as a TDT reporter.
  He showed considerable interest and I subsequently arranged for the
Tasmanian essential oils people to contact him.
  Our embassy staff prodded me into asking a question about shift work.
  The Soviets normally work during the daytime on weekdays.  However, Gorbachev
had recently decreed that shift work should be implemented to use idle
production capacity, and that Leningrad would be the first to use the new
system.
  I naively asked Mr Aleksandrovich what he thought of the idea.  His
pleasantries vanished.  It was obviously a touchy subject.
  He explained that his plant was labour intensive and that there was little
idle machine capacity at night.  At this point our Soviet minders started
arguing with him.
  The ensuing discussion was geographical as well as ideological.  Our minders
were all from Moscow, the Big Apple of the USSR.
  Anybody from Leningrad was distinctively provincial.  For their part,
Leningrad residents consider themselves intellectually and artistically
superior to the clods from Moscow.
  John Denton and Rakesh Ahudja from our embassy were overjoyed with the
shift work information which became another piece for their jigsaw puzzle
of Soviet society.
  Mr Aleksandrovich and the blonde enthusiastically waved goodbye from their
factory door, relieved that we had gone.
  We weren't quite sure why we had visited the perfumery in the first place
but had little time to ponder this question as we hurtled off to the Hermitage
to see acres and acres of Rembrandts.


</subsample>
