Govt told to act on bankruptcies By Leonie Biddle  

  A high level of bankruptcies is costing Northern Territory suppliers
hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.
  NT Trading Association president, Ms Lea Rosenwax, said problems with
failed businesses had reached epidemic proportions.
  The main difficulty stemmed from bankrupt company directors starting
new businesses despite outstanding debts from their previous failed
enterprises, Ms Rosenwax said.
  As a result, each Territory supplier was writing off more than $50 000
a year on bad debts.
  "The situation has reached epidemic proportions because no one is taking
action against these people," Ms Rosenwax said.
  "You find businesses going down the gurgle one week and almost immediately
the same people bob up under a new name without any repercussions."
  She said the revamped NT Companies Act prescribed substantial penalties
for undischarged bankrupts.
  But these were not being enforced.
  The problem was exacerbated by the NT Government continuing to award
contracts to builders who were undischarged bankrupts.
  "It is up to the Government to enforce its own regulations but it doesn't
want to know," she said.
  Ms Rosenwax said the trading association, representing 50 Territory building
suppliers, had approached Transport and Works Minister, Mr Nick Dondas.
  But his office had responded it was up to the market place to prosecute
defaulting customers.
  "We believe it is up to the Government to ensure contracts are not awarded
to people who are breaking the law," she said.
  The association also had approached Corporate Affairs Office in Darwin.
  It wanted the office to enforce the Act and refuse to register companies
whose directors were undischarged bankrupts.
  "It seems the Corporate Affairs does not have the resources to check
the backgrounds of company directors."
  Ms Rosenwax said the association would not let the matter rest.
  The community had paid dearly for the lack of action against unscrupulous
business practices.
  One survey showed 540 unincorporated businesses in South Australia and
the NT were declared bankrupt in 12 months to June 1985.
  These failed businesses, including registered firms, had cost SA and
NT creditors almost $11 million.
  Ms Rosenwax  said the association had decided to get tough on unscrupulous
business people.
  It also was pushing for the urgent establishment of a register of companies
with proven expertise and financial backing to carry through contracts.
  It had been pressing for this move for a number of years to reduce the
incidence of companies defaulting on a project while it was in midstream.

