<subsample>
	<id> A36f </id>
	


	<source> The Sun Herald - 14 September 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Penfolds opens its high-tech bunker  </h>
	


	<bl> Huon Hooke </bl>
	

When Penfolds concluded a successful takeover of Allied Vintners in 1985
its managers were horrified at the plans for the new Seaview champagne cellars
at Reynella, south of Adelaide.
  Allied, which encompassed Wynns, Seaview, Tulloch and Killawarra, was
spending millions on what Penfolds thought was a highly impractical*highly-impractical and 
inefficient champagne complex, made up of three partly underground bunkers
with six enormous concrete slabs as floors.  
  Penfolds' first move was to scrap the Seaview plans, and secondly to draw
up plans of its own for a new Seaview cellar alongside the Penfolds-Kaiser
Stuhl stronghold at Nuriootpa in the Barossa Valley.
   But the contract for the concrete slabs couldn't be cancelled. Penfolds scratched its corporate head and came up with the solution. It used them as walls for one gigantic Seaview building, which was declared open by the SA Premier John Bannon last weekend. The building covers 1.5ha (3.5 acres) and you could fit three football fields in it.
  The standing joke at &quot;pennies&quot; is that when the holocaust comes the employees reckon the bunker will be the safest place to hide. An alternative joke could be that it's almost big enough to hold all the staff of Penfolds, which is the biggest Australian wine company by far.
  Managing director Ian Mackley siad Penfolds crushed 87,600 tonnes of grapes last vintage. He reminded his audience that that memorable vessel, the Queen Mary, weighed a mere 82,000 tonnes.
  Not the least impressive statistic is the amount of loot that's been spent on this fantastic fizz factory: a cool $15 million.
  There's little doubt that Penfolds has the biggest winemaking complex in the southern hemisphere. In France's Champagne district towns of Reims and Epernay there are bigger sparkling wine operation, but I don't believe there is one that could match the impressive array of state-of-the art equipment.
  Perhaps the most startling are the automatic remuage machines, which shake the yeast sediment down to the necks of the bottles after the bottle-ageing. These do, in 10 days, the job that men used to need two months to do. Designed, built and patented in Australia they are bigger than any I have seen in France. They are computer-controlled so they operate continuously. Each machine can take 4,000 bottles and shake them down in 10 days - and there are eight of them!
  Seaview sells about 170,000 dozen bottles of champagne a year, putting it well behind Penfolds' big one, Minchinbury, running at about 550,000. But Seaview is by far the biggest-selling sparkler made by the full methode champenoise - the traditional French champagne method.
  This is a more costly and slow process than transfer disgorgement, the method used by Minchinbury, Seppelts Great Western Imperial Reserve, Orlando Carrington and others. But even Seaview's 270,000 cases is small bubbles beside biggest real champagne,Moet and Chandon, which sells about 1.5 million cases a year.
  However Penfolds is making plenty of room for expansion. The sparkling wine market is growing at about 20 per cent a year, and the new cellar has the capacity to produce 500,000 dozen a year. The storage capacity of the building is one million cases. The base wines are not made in this cellar, but they are bottled and undergo their secondary fermentation there, then afterwards their 12 months bottle maturation on yeast lees, disgorgement, liqueuring, recorking, labelling and packaging.


</subsample>
