It's no cheer on beer  

HOTELS across Melbourne - and the state - are facing a crisis.
  A Sunday Press survey showed many hotels have already run out of draught
beer, and many more are running low.
  And packaged beer is dwindling too.
  With hot weather forecast for the next few days and pre-Christmas parties
starting to get into full swing, flummoxed publicans are counting near-empty
cellars.
  Licensed grocers are in trouble, too.
  Secretary-manager of the Retail Liquor Merchants Association, Mr Bruno
Scarcella warned last night:
  "It's a very desperate situation.
  "Retailers depend on income from Christmas trade to pay licence fees,
due at the end of the year," he said.
  Seven hundred CUB workers went on strike last Monday week in a dispute
over a Christmas bonus.
  CUB workers in NSW and WA already have such a bonus - which is effectively
two weeks' pay, in contrast to a one-week pay bonus Victorian colleages
receive.
  The striking workers already have a 35-hour week, 9-day fortnight; four
weeks' annual leave with a 50 per cent holiday loading; and all overtime
worked is paid at double time (a recent introduction).
  As the effects of the strike hit home, a CUB spokesman said there was a
glimmer of hope.
  On Friday a letter outlining Carlton and United Breweries position was
sent to all striking workers.
  "The letter outlined a set of proposals by management to the workforce,"
 a CUB spokesman said last night.
  But a spokesman for the Federated Liquor and Allied Industry Employees'
Union, Mr Joe Goddard, said: "There is no immediate likelihood of the matter
being settled - next week or the week after that."
  It's not yet a case of the pub with no beer in Melbourne - but today it's
the city of publicans without cheer.
  Here's a round-up of some of the Melbourne's leading hotels:
  Hyatt, Collins St:
  Supplies "desperate" said purchasing manager Alan Cooper.  "We have a
limited supply of locally bottled beer."
  Toorak Hotel:
  "Plenty of bottled Carlton draught," said manager Graham Sutherland.
 "And Fourex and light ale on tap."
  Burvale Hotel, Nunawading.
  About a week's supply of bulk beer left, said manager Ray Jacobson.
  "We have enough bottled beer for the time being with minor restrictions.
 There's plenty of Fourex but we are short on Carlton Light."
  Anchor and Hope, Richmond:
  Fourex - no Carlton or Fosters on tap and no cans, said supervisor Anna
Conway.
  Cherry Tree Hotel, Richmond:
  Situation critical, said licensee Scot Palmer.
  "We've got no bulk beer at all.  We've been on packaged beer for the
past four or five days.
  Sandringham Hotel:  
  Barman Andrew Argent gloated:  "We got a delivery of bulk beer just before 
the strike began.
  "We've got about a dozen barrels left (400 glasses a barrel), and there's
enough cans then to last until Friday."
  Young & Jackson's Swanston St:
  "It's not panic yet but we will be out of Carlton by early this week,"
 said manager Mark Freudenstein.
  Association with Bond Breweries will keep him supplied with Fourex and
Swan.
  Tankerville Arms, Fitzroy:
  Situation disastrous, said licencee Percy Jones.
  "We'll be out of beer by today or tomorrow.  We've almost sold out of
all our interstate beers."
  St Albans Hotel:
  Panic buying, reported manager Bill Avram.
  "We've got no bottles, no cans, no draught - only a few stubbies left."
  Rifle Club Hotel Williamstown North:  
  Supplies of Queensland Fosters cans "unlimited", reported manager Jahn
Schwenche.
  "We've got enough to last two weeks.  And we hope to get another truck-load
Monday.
  "We're selling the cans at their proper price," he added.
  Matthew Flinders Hotel Chadstone:
  A sign screams "Unlimited supplies" ... well at least for three to four
weeks.  It's Queensland Fosters ordered at the beginning of the strike,
said manager Bobby Zagame.

