Thrilling Grand Prix for world crown Champions set to battle out old scores in Adelaide By Fred Knight  

  The 1986 World Grand Prix Championship will be decided in a flashing
blur of speed and sound over Adelaide's now famous round-the-houses course
today.
  The race, besides resolving who will wear the world racing crown, will
also stamp Adelaide as a major venue of the international racing circuit.
  The event promises to be an even bigger success than last year's debut
which has already received the coveted Foca Award for the best Grand Prix
of the 1985 season.
  The Adelaide organisers have spared no effort to make the event even
better than last year.
  They have added many more grandstand viewing areas this year and room
for a lot more spectators, many of whom could not find a place for the race
last year.
  But almost certainly the biggest factor of this year's Grand Prix season
finale will be the fact the race will decide the 1986 world champion.
  With Alain Prost bringing his Marlboro McLaren home in second place
in Mexico, he has moved back into second place in the world championship
points standings, just one point ahead of Nelson Piquet and only six points
behind leader Nigel Mansell who finished fifth at the last race and thus failed
to wrap up the 1986 title he had been leading by 10 points.
  "It should be a fantastic race for the public with three drivers fighting
for the title," said Prost.
  Certainly all the pressure will be on Mansell and I am going into the
race completely relaxed."
  Prost is aiming to be the first driver to win the world championship two
years in succession in more than 20 years.
  Last year's Australian Grand Prix winner, Keke Rosberg, will be ending
his Formula 1 driving career in Adelaide just as ex-world champion Niki
Lauda did with the Marlboro McLaren team at the same race last year.
  Niki was leading the race when a braking problem saw him spin out of
the race and into the wall.
  One feature of the Adelaide Circuit is its "billiard-ball" smooth surface
and that's something which will certainly appeal to both the Ferrari drivers
Michele Alboreto and Stefan Johansson.
  "We have had troubles with our chassis handling on bumpy circuits so Adelaide
will hopefully give us a better chance of a win in our final race of the
season," said Alboreto.
  Certainly one driver who will be looking forward to that possibility
will be Johansson, who will be driving his last race for the Ferrari team.
  "I have had two great years with the team and it would be fantastic to
leave them with my first GP win and the first for the team this season,"
said an optimistic Stefan.
  Hopes are also high for the Minardi team members Andrea Decesaris and
Sandro Nannini to take their first points of the season after Decesaris
scored an encouraging eighth-place in Mexico the best finishing position
of the season for the Minardi Team.
  It is bound to be a nailbiting affair as Britain's Mansell takes on his
Williams team-mate, Brazilian Piquet, and Frenchman Prost in the last
desperate battle to come out on top.
  "It's going to be a terrific finale to what has been one of the best seasons
for years," Mansell said.
  The big Englishman wrecked his own chances to pull off the championship
victory earlier this month by failing to find first gear when the traffic
lights changed to green at the start of the Mexican Grand Prix.
  The gear box worked perfectly throughout the race once he got going -
in last place - and he clawed his way back to finish fifth behind Piquet.

