<subsample>
	<id> A43c </id>
	


	<source> Sunday Tasmanian - 30 November 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> Health care benefits worth checking out </h>
	

MOST health fringe benefits are available to Pensioner Health Benefits (PHB)
cardholders, with some of them being available to other pensioners.
  Depending on their income, widows, age and invalid pensioners, spouse
carers, wife's pensioners and supporting parents are eligible for a PHB
card.
  Your eligibility for the card will be assessed at the time as your
pension is being considered.
  Fringe benefits can be worth more than $20 a week, so it is well worth
checking what is available and making use of your entitlements.
  You can ask for details at the Department of Social Security.
  Some of the benefits in the area of health are as follows.
  The National Medicare scheme means that the Government pays 85 per cent
of all doctors'*doctor's bills, providing the charge is no higher than the 
schedule fee (check with your Medicare office).
  If your doctor bulk bills (that is, sends the bill directly to the
Government) you will not have to pay anything.
  If the doctor does not bulk bill, you will have to pay the extra 15 per
cent.  Many doctors who do not bulk bill for all their patients will do so for
pensioners.
  Under Medicare, free public hospital care is available to everyone.
  PHB and Health Benefit cardholders and their dependants can get those
drugs listed on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme list free of charge.
  Health Care cardholders and other pensioners whose income is too high for
a PHB card but low enough for a part pension may be eligible for a
Pharmaceutical Concession card, which means they pay a reduced charge for
a listed drug.
  It may be possible to get some assistance with spectacles, but there is
a means test.  You will need to inquire at the Department of Community Welfare. 
You will have to get the prescription from a doctor which will be covered
by Medicare.
  There may be podiatry services at reduced cost.  Your local community
health centre or your local hospital may be able to help you.
  Various aids and appliances are available from your State Health Department.
  If you want your own choice of doctor in a public hospital, you will be
charged for accommodation and you will need private insurance to meet the
cost.
  You will also need to insure yourself if you want the option of a private
hospital if you become ill.
  Sometimes the waiting lists for surgery in public hospitals are long.  
  Older people can be particularly badly affected by delays as many of their
health problems are chronic and not urgent, for example a need for hip
replacement surgery.
  If you are in hospital for longer than 35 days at the one time, unless
your doctor certifies you are in need of ongoing acute care, you will
automatically be reclassified as a &quot;nursing home type&quot; patient.
  In this case the law says your benefits must be reduced and you will have
to meet part of the cost.
  Private hospital insurance does not entitle you to a single room in a
private hospital.
  Single rooms are given solely on the basis of medical need - there is
no difference between Medicare and private patients.
  However, if a single room is available, and no-one else needs it, you
can request it if you are a private patient.
  You should take into account theatre fees as well as accommodation when
you are considering private insurance cover.
  Private health insurance funds will meet the cost of many extra health
care services; dental care, physiotherapy, chiropody, home nursing,
chiropractors and osteopaths are examples.
  The extent of these benefits depends on the amount of insurance you pay.
  You will need to find out the details from the various funds.
  The costs of these services are not met by Medicare unless they are available
through public hospitals.
  Private funds will also meet the cost of spectacles.
  These are not covered by Medicare, although the cost of visiting an
optometrist to have your eyes tested or to get a prescription is covered.
  All the private funds apply qualifying periods and yearly limits for
benefits.
  These conditions are imposed to stop people joining the fund for a short
time, making a big claim and then cancelling their membership. 


</subsample>
