`Rolling over' pays off By PETER WEATHERHEAD, a licenced investment adviser with SBT Bank Investment
Service  

APPROVED Deposit Funds (ADF) were created in 1983 as a result of the Federal
Government's decision to increase the tax liability on lump sum payments.
  By rolling over eligible termination payments into an ADF, considerable
taxation benefits can be realised.
  From 1-7-83, a flat tax rate of 30 per cent is payable whereas before
1-7-83 only 5 per cent of the service component of lump sums was included
as assessable income in the year it was received.
  An exception is made for retirees of 55 years or older where the first
$55,000 of their lump sum is taxed at 16 per cent.
  Some of the advantages of Approved Deposit Funds are:
  Tax is deferred and pre-July, 1983, concessions preserved until withdrawal
from the fund or the depositor turns 65;
  The deferred tax payment earns interest while in the ADF:
  No tax is payable on earnings while invested in the fund;
  On death, the funds are tax free to the deceased taxpayer's dependants;
  Timing of withdrawals can minimise tax liability;
  Tax concessions for withdrawals are made to a depositor after the age
of 55 years;
  Withdrawals can be made at any time, such withdrawals will be taxed at
lump sum rates which are normally well below income tax rates.
  "Rollovers" are not limited to retirees.  
  An Approved Deposit Fund can be used by any employee receiving an eligible
termination payment due to resignation or redundancy.
  The Tasmanian Banks' Approved Deposit Fund recently launched jointly by
the SBT Bank and the LBS Statewide Bank provides Tasmanians with an opportunity
to turn their lump sum superannuation or severance pay into a locally managed,
high earning, tax-protected investment scheme.
 Professional independent advice should be sought before retirement or leaving
a current employer to draw up an investment strategy which will provide
income and tax savings.
 Further information can be obtained by contacting any officer of the SBT
Bank.

