Big cost savings in block grazing  

BLOCK GRAZING has been widely adopted as a grassland management practice
by the dairy industry, but farmers involved in other grazing industries
around the country have been slower to recognise its potential.
  One exception is Tasmanian, Michael Terry, of Dairy Plains near Deloraine,
who started block grazing sheep eight years ago.
  Since then he has been actively advocating the practice, and has strong
economic backing to support his claim.
  Michael's brother, Tim, told the Grassland Society of Victoria last week
the financial gains of the system had surprised them.
  Michael, Tim, another brother Geoff, and their father Ned, run "Bankton"
a 1950 hectare property under the Great Western Tiers mountain range in
northern Tasmania.
  The sheep and cattle operation is run by Michael and the cropping and
drainage enterprise by Tim.  Geoff manages a 550 sow piggery which supplies
half of Tasmania's market pigs.
  Calculations made by Tasmanian Department of Agriculture officer, Mr Ron
McCutcheon, showed that in the Terry's situation, block-grazing cattle
could save up to $37 a head each year in feed and management costs.
  AND the cost of block-grazing sheep was 12 cents a head compared with
$2.90 a head a year that it cost before the new system was adopted.
  Mr McCutcheon's figures were based on the additional costs of running
the animals over the entire property. 
  For that reason, the cost of fertiliser was not included.
  His calculations included the cost of growing turnips and feeding hay,
which was done before block grazing was started.
  Mr McCutcheon compared the costs of running cattle before and after
the Terrys adopted block grazing.  
  He said that in the Terrys' situation, the cost of growing turnips was $69
a hectare, including labor, machinery, and seed; a total of $3450 for 50
hectares.
  And, for every hectare the Terrys sowed as turnips, a hectare was out
to pasture, which incurred an additional cost of $90 a hectare, or $4500
each year.
  To feed 2500 bales of hay out each year at $2 a bale cost $5000, so that
the total costs summed up to $12,950.
  That meant that to fatten 340 cattle, it cost $38.08 cents a head.
  Mr McCutcheon calculated the cost of installing electric fencing to
hold the 340 cattle, based on the construction of four fences with double
wires.
  The total cost was $1490, or $4.38 a head.
  However, the fencing was expected to last at least seven years which reduced
the annual cost of 63 cents a head.
  He said that while the polyflex wire had a much shorter life span, the
posts and units could last much longer, so that seven years was a conservative
average estimate. 
  Experience in Victoria suggests normal 16 gauge wire can be used.  If
using polyflex, the black-yellow coating resists ultraviolet damage longer
than the pink.
  CALCULATIONS for the sheep operation were made in the same way, and came
out at $2.90 a head a year for conventional grazing, compared with 12 cents
a head a year to block-graze them.
  At his property, "Bankton", Mr Terry block-grazes 6500 ewes and 340 cattle
over winter.
  The ewes start with small blocks when they are in early pregnancy, and
as they become more in lamb, the area is extended up to three times its
original size.
  THE size of the block required is estimated by a visual assessment of
the sheep and their condition.
  A total of 2200 ewes are run in each mob, starting on a one-hectare block
of rye-grass and clover pasture.
  The sheep are not given water.  According to Mr Terry, they get enough 
moisture from the grass.
  "They clean up the ferns, tussocks and sags, and let the grass grow," he
said.                                                               
  He begins block-grazing in the first week in May and finishes in the
last week in August, before lambing begins in September.
  Moving them every day reduces parasite problems as they get clean feed,
but the stock are still drenched at the beginning and end of the program.
  The "Bankton" sheep flock comprises 4500 Corriedales and 2000
Corriedale-Border Leicester crosses.
  The lambs are sold at four months of age in December, some being kept
back as replacement ewes.
  The Terrys breed all their replacement ewes to avoid the risks of
introducing footrot and lice.
  Between February and April each year, the Terrys buy about 650 day-old
calves, of which 200 are fostered by a dairy herd, and the rest fed by 
automatic feeders.
  The cattle are sold as two-year-olds, and about 600 cattle are fattened
and sold each year.
  This winter is the first time Michael Terry has used block grazing management
on his cattle herd, and 340 yearling Friesians were started on the program
in May.
  The cattle are moved every second day and need an outside water supply.
  AS a supplement, they also receive three large round bales of barley
straw every second day.
  While the electric fencing for the sheep flock runs off a six-volt battery,
fencing for cattle has to be run off the mains.
  Block grazing is catching on in Victoria.  There are now about 20
properties using it compared with only one two years ago.
  It won't suit all grazing properties, but even those with a water logging
problem can be improved as Tim Terry's work on sub surface drainage is
showing.  Tim says he can pay for the cost of drainage in the first year
with a crop of potatoes.  After that, potatoes, beans, peas and 10 tonne
a hectare wheat crops are all a bonus.  But more of that in coming weeks.

