AN eight-year battle - then AB licence is granted  

AN eight-year battle to gain a private artificial breeding service
licence suddenly ended recently for Gippsland inseminator John Pollard.
  Without warning or explanation he was told to apply, yet again, for a
licence and it was granted.
  Licences to operate an AB service in Victoria are granted at the discretion
of the Minister for Agriculture and Rural Affairs.
  Since 1978, Ministers of both Liberal and Labor governments have found
it more discreet not to grant AB licences to private operators.
  John Pollard believes the injustice of withholding licences has been
recognised and the situation is being rectified.
  The Minister for Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Mr Walker, has confirmed
that issuing licences for private AB services has been reviewed.  He said
licences would be granted provided strict health and quality control
conditions were met.  DARA officers would monitor all licensed services.
  John Pollard was one of several private operators whose activities were
limited in 1978 by grouping them, without consultation, under the licence
of Elders Breeding Services.
  He said that year a meeting was held in Melbourne of some parties involved
with the artificial breeding industry but at which private inseminators were
not represented.
  FOLLOWING it, he was issued with his A grade inseminator's licence as
a subcentre of Elders and was told by the Department of Agriculture that
only one inseminator could operate from his service in any one 24-hour
period.  John was employing another inseminator at the time.
  He understood the move was made to protect the co-operative insemination
services from competition by private inseminators.
  John retaliated with a persistent eight-year campaign to have the ruling
changed.  He hounded local MPs, the Ombudsman, sought legal advice and
repeatedly approached the Ministers for Agriculture during that period.
  "At one stage, a Minister was writing letters to me addressed `Dear John',
we had had so many communications," John said.
  "I wanted a full licence which would allow me to store and pack semen
for sale and offer an unrestricted insemination service which gave farmers
freedom of choice at a competitive price." 
  JOHN's entry into the private AB field was more by accident that design.
 He trained as a commercial inseminator in 1968, then worked with the local
AB co-operative for about five years.  
  That was a sideline to working on the family dairy farm selected near 
Warragul by one of his ancestors in 1873.  
  In 1976, a couple of local farmers asked John to inseminate their cows
with some semen they had bought privately.  He obliged.  Then, before
long, the bush telegraph had spread the word that John was available and
more and more farmers sought his services.
  Before long, he had recruited another inseminator and they were both being 
kept busy.
  Then, the restriction was imposed on his business but the demand
continued.  John was joined by former Warragul AB co-op manager Henry Ziebell
and he also recruited a veterinarian to assist part-time.
  Veterinary registration automatically includes approval to inseminate.
 Officially, John and Henry worked day about and the vet provided back up.
  John said his association with Elders was quite normal.  He was able to
secure semen from any registered artificial breeding organisation in
Australia.  
  VAB Co-Op were unable to sell direct to him but John said he could get
all the VAB semen he wanted through other sources.  Now that he has been
granted a full licence, VAB are more than happy to sell to him.
  Since John's PBS Artificial Breeding Services were licensed three months
ago, he has recruited another inseminator, Trevor Wozencroft, who used to
manage a Queensland AB service.  So, PBS Artificial Breeding Services now
has three full-time inseminators, John, Henry and Trevor, and the vet still
works with them part-time.
  John still operates his service from his home on the family farm where
they milk up to 250 cows a year.
BEFORE his licence was granted, his AB service premises were inspected
to establish that the buildings were suitable.  His records system was checked
to make sure a thorough and accurate account could be kept of bulls used,
cows mated, and movement of semen could be identified and traced in case
of disease outbreak; and that semen collected from farms and stored for
farmer's private use and not for sale was handled and stored in premises
separate from those used for semen for sale.
  He had to undertake to offer his service year round and make available
to customers semen from all major suppliers.
  John said he endorsed "110 per cent" the principle of inspection and
licensing to control the standards of AB services.
ALMOST all his clients are stud breeders and mainly dairy farmers.  John
does not quite know how the stud involvement came about although he is
enthusiastic about pure breeding in cattle.
  "You can go somewhere when you are producing purebreds," he said.  "Nothing
looks better than a herd of pure Friesians or Jerseys in a paddock."
  Servicing stud breeders led him to start an on-farm semen collection service
a couple of years ago.  That is how he fills in his spare times during the
off-mating season.
  He not only collects semen and stores it for clients to use when they
want it but offers a pre-season fertility check of bulls. 
  And he is also being called upon by beef breeders for whom he provides
the artificial insemination service in a veterinary supervised synchronised
mating program.  John co-operates with veterinarians performing embryo
transplants.
  John will help farmers select AB bulls but always leave the final decision,
and responsibility for it, with them.
  He does not believe the apparent easing of licensing private artificial
insemination services in Victoria is going to produce a rush of new operators.
  The capital costs associated with bulk liquid nitrogen storages, on farm
containers, laboratory equipment and other facilities would make a newcomer
to the business think twice.
  Also, farmers are already well serviced in Victoria, indeed better than
they were in the past.  John pointed out that not too many years ago AB
services and semen were offered on a take it or leave it basis.
  Competition created by several bull farms, imported semen and new technology
which makes it easy and cheap to move semen across the world, has also led
to improved service for farmers.
  John said there were now resident representatives of VAB and Elders Breeding
Services in Gippsland competing to secure the farmer's business.

