<section>

<title> H:GOVERNMENT AND CORPORATE </title>

<sample><id> H01 </id>

<note> 2001 words </note>

<source> Kakadu: A World Heritage of Unsurpassed Beauty </source>

<bl> By Derrick Ovington </bl>

<h> A HERITAGE OF AUSTRALIAN ANIMALS AND PLANTS </h>

Conservation status    Australia is an island continent and as a consequence,
except for migratory species, Australian animals and plants have evolved
in isolation and many are specific to the continent. However, numerous Kakadu
species have retained affinities with those of South-East Asia, the nearest
land mass, apparently reflecting their shared common ancestry when Australia
and Asia were joined together.
  Kakadu is the home of a rich heritage of native animals and plants; many
are both attractive and of scientific interest. Because of the value of
native animals and plants to Aborigines, it is not surprising that they
feature in Aboriginal mythology and rock art. The rock paintings, particularly
of animals, provide evidence both of long-term changes in the species present
and of the continued presence in the area of other species for thousands
of years.
  Each of the numerous Park habitats has its own characteristic community
of living things interacting in innumerable ways with one another and with
their environments. Knowledge of these functional relationships is critical
for management of the Park. Detailed research is providing vital information
to enable the implementation of effective management practices to safeguard
this remarkable range of species and habitats. Both are irreplaceable, having
resulted from over 20 million years of evolution.
  The species present at Kakadu differ greatly in distribution and conservation
status. Some are common in Australia or across tropical northern Australia
and are not under threat. Other species though widespread in northern Australia
are rare and their survival may depend in large measure on the protection
afforded by the National Park. A few species have a very restricted
distribution, being found only at Kakadu and sometimes only in certain
localities because of their very precise environmental requirements. Knowledge
of the abundance and distribution of species in the Park helps to ensure
the protection of rare and endangered species and improves the likelihood
of people seeing plants and animals of special interest to them.
  All the different kinds of native living things present have a role to
play in maintaining the delicate harmony of Kakadu with its self-regulating
and continuing sequence of reproduction, life, death and decay. Of all tropical
wilderness areas in the southern hemisphere Kakadu National Park is the
most outstanding sanctuary, providing a haven where a wide variety of animals
and plants, including some rare or endangered species, can survive in natural
surroundings. Let us keep it that way.

<h> Animals </h>
Whilst Kakadu is renowned for its variety of wild animals,
undoubtedly the species tally is incomplete. Already scientists have recorded
about 50 mammal, 275 bird, 75 reptile, 25 frog and 55 fish species. There
is a great diversity of insects; about 4500 species have been recognised.
As systematic faunal surveys of different habitats are completed, new species
for the Park, and some new to science, are being discovered and species
not seen for many years are being rediscovered.
  Most native animals at Kakadu are harmless to people but some can be plain
annoying, especially insects which buzz around, bite or suck blood from
people. Mosquitoes thrive in the Kakadu environment and can be particularly
troublesome to campers. Other creatures such as venomous snakes and large
crocodiles are dangerous if provoked. Animals protected in national parks
tend to have little fear of people and, with some justificaiton, may regard
people as food or as intruders to their territories, posing a challenging
threat to themselves or their offspring. Naturally, in these circumstances
some wild animals may react aggressively to humans. Consequently it is
advisable not to act foolishly by taking risks. Watching wild animals at
Kakadu can be a pleasant experience but sensible people keep a safe distance
from wild animals and use telephoto lenses to take close-up photographs.
Most native animals are nocturnal and the best time to see some species
is dusk or shortly after dawn.

<h> Mammals </h>
The native mammals are generally shy and avoid people by hiding
or running away. Dingoes or wild dogs Canis familiaris dingo range widely
in the Park, feeding mainly on other mammals, birds and reptiles. Most often
they are encountered as single animals or as a pair but sometimes family
packs of up to five are seen. Virtually all dingoes at Kakadu are pure bred
for there has been little interbreeding with domestic dogs.
  Macropods are common in some habitats. The gregarious agile wallabies
Macropus agilis often move in groups through the open woodland whilst wallaroos
or euros M. robustus are usually seen as solitary animals in upland wooded
areas. Mobs of antilopine kangaroos M. antilopinus are occasionally seen
on stony ridges or in open woodland, particularly where plants are regenerating
after fire. Spectacled hare wallabies Lagorchestes conspicillatus and northern
nailtail wallabies Onychogalea unguifera are present in small numbers in
grassland and open woodland areas. The very shy black wallaroos Macropus
bernardus are largely confined to the Park. The relatively small nabarleks
Peradorcas concinna and short eared rock wallabies Petrogale brachyotis
inhabit the rocky formations of the escarpment and outliers.
  The smaller mammals tend to be inconspicuous and only seen briefly. The
arboreal sugar gliders Petaurus breviceps and northern brushtail possums
Trichosurus arnhemensis as well as northern brown bandicoots Isoodon macrourus
are sometimes observed during the day in wooded areas. Several kinds of
water rats and other small rodents live in freshwater lagoon and floodplain
habitats but are rarely encountered. Echidnas Tachyglossus aculeatus, sometimes
called spiny anteaters, are to be found on the escarpment. Some small mammals
are largely confined to rocky areas; typical of these are rock possums
Pseudocheirus dahli, Woodward's thick tailed rats Zyzomys woodwardi and
Harney's marsupial mice Parantechinus bilarni, only known since 1948. Many
species of small mammals are essentailly nocturnal and are aggressive, fierce
carnivores, for instance northern native cats or northern quolls Dasyurus
hallucatus and arboreal phascogales Phascogale tapoatafa.
  Within the Park there is a remarkable variety of flying mammals, twenty-six
of the sixty-five species of Australian bats being present. The bats of
Kakadu range in size from large, fruit-eating flying foxes, weighing at
maturity over half a kilogram, to small, mouse-sized animals. Whilst some
people are apprehensive of bats, the ill repute of bats is undeserved. These
remarkable animals are highly adapted to enable them to fly and navigate
at night. Bats spend the days roosting in groves of trees, caves, rock
overhangs, tree hollows and under bark. They are often seen flying at dusk
when they leave their roosts to forage.
  The two species of flying foxes present at Kakadu, black flying foxes
Pteropus alecto and little red flying foxes P. scapulatus, are the most
conspicuous of the bats. Roosting by day in large, and somewhat smelly,
camps in mangroves, paperbark swamps and monsoon forests, they emerge in
droves to feed at night on the fruits, flowers and leaves of trees,
particularly of Ficus, Eucalyptus and Melaleuca species. Often they are
seen, or heard, squabbling amongst themselves whilst feeding at Nourlangie
Camp and Park Headquarters. Since flying foxes are important pollinators
of plants and disperse viable seed through their excrement, they are important
for the perpetuation of some plant species.
  Kakadu is a key refuge for at least four species of endangered bats: ghost
bats Macroderma gigas, orange horseshoe bats Rhinonicteris aurantius, lesser
wart nosed horseshoe bats Hipposideros stenotis and white striped sheathtail
bats Taphozous kapalgensis.
  Ghost bats are carnivorous, feeding on insects, mammals, small birds,
and even other bats on occasion. They roost in caves and overhangs with
stable temperature and humidity regimes. Orange horseshoe bats are very
rare, with possibly fewer than 2000 living in Australia. Although individuals
have been seen at Kakadu, no roosting sites have been discovered. Bats of
this species are known to roost in very hot, humid caves and being very
sensitive to human interference may abandon caves if disturbed. They feed
on moths, beetles, wasps and ants caught while flying low over the ground
Little is known of the biology of lesser wart nosed horseshoe bats. They
have two warty protuberances on the nose which may aid echo location of
objects when flying at night. White striped sheathtail bats, only discovered
in 1979, are apparently endemic to Kakadu National Park. Found in open eucalypt
and pandanus woodland, they fly high and fast in pursuit of insects and
are believed to roost in the hollows of trees or under exfoliating bark.

<h> Birds </h>
Kakadu National Park has a remarkable combination of bird species;
about a third of all Australian species has been recorded there. In particular,
it is a major Australian refuge for many kinds of tropical birds.
  Birds of prey range widely over the Park, differing in size from large,
majestic wedgetailed eagles Aquila audax to small, but lightning quick,
collared sparrowhawks Accipiter cirrhocephalus. Black kites Milvus migrans
are the most common birds of prey in the Park. Possibly the most frequent
bird sound heard in the dry season is the shrill cry of the ubiquitous
whistling kites Haliastur sphenurus, gliding gracefully or circling on thermal
air currents on the look-out for carrion. Letter winged kites Elanus scriptus,
a relatively rare species, are present in the Park and are most active at
night, when they may be seen hunting over the floodplains for rodents. The
discovery of a small breeding pupulation at Kakadu extended the previously
known range in the Northern Territory by several hundred kilometres. Both
grey and white phases of grey goshawks Accipiter novaehollandiae occur in
wooded areas. Rare red goshawks Erythrotriorchis radiatus, which feed mainly
on other birds, are largely restricted to the sandstone woodland. White
breasted sea eagles Haliaeetus leucogaster are often seen singly or in pairs
perched on trees overlooking billabongs or flying with strong, leisurely
wing beats along waterways in search of unsuspecting fish on which they
swoop and catch them in their talons.
  Along the coast and on the tidal flats there is a great variety of birds.
Some are all year residents, others are migratory, mainly returning from
more northerly or southerly latitudes at the onset of the wet or the dry
season. The coastal bird fauna includes boobies, cormorants, curlews, egrets,
greenshanks, herons, ospreys, oyster catchers, plovers, rails, stilts,
sandpipers, terns and turnstones.
  The mangrove swamps are important roosting and breeding sites for many
bird species, including colonial nesters such as egrets and cormorants.
Some birds are largely confined to the mangroves. Examples of these are
mangrove kingfishers Halycon chloris, mangrove robins Eopsaltria pulverulenta,
chestnut rails Eulabeornis castaneoventris, white breasted whistlers
Pachycephala lanioides, yellow white eyes Zosterops lutea, large billed
warblers Gerygone magnirostris and mangrove warblers G. levigaster. Mangrove
warblers are noteworthy for their sustained sweet song and compact pear-shaped
nests, made of bark, grass stems and seaweed neatly bound together with
spider web, and usually seen suspended from leafy mangrove branches.
  Because of their variety and profusion much interest has centred on
waterbirds. At nesting time the breeding grounds, hidden amidst the dense
sedge and grass cover of the floodplains, resound with the noise of geese
and ducks. The populations of some waterbird species, although abundant
in Kakadu, are largely restricted in Asutralia to a narrow band along the
northern coastline. Typical of these are magpie geese Anseranas semipalmata,
green pygmy geese Nettapus pulchellus, Burdekin ducks or Radjah shelducks
Tadorna radjah and water whistling ducks Dendrocygna arcuata.
  Some waterbirds common at Kakadu are relatively widespread in Australia,
for instance jabiru storks Xenorhynchus asiaticus, the namesake of Jabiru
town with enormous spear-like beaks to catch fish, and lotus birds or
lilytrotters Irediparra gallinacea, whose long hind toes enable them to
walk on water weeds and which build their nests on floating vegetation.
Other widespread species include pelicans Pelecanus conspicillatus and darters
Anhinga melanogaster, sometimes called snake birds because of their resemblance
to snakes when swimming submerged with the head and neck above water.
Cormorants, egrets, herons and ibis abound. Nankeen or rufous night herons
Nycticorax caledonicus are very common along the watercourses. Recently
a large rookery of this heron, with as many as 2000 nesting birds, was
discovered in rainforest at Kakadu.  

</sample>



<sample><id> H02 </id>

<note> 2014 words </note>

<source> Nursing Homes and Hostels Review </source>

<h> Chapter Six </h>
<h> Nursing home and hostel recurrent funding </h>

<h> Introduction </h>

Within the context of a continuum of care, according to
assessed levels of individual dependency, funding arrangements
with respect to hostel and nursing home residents should:

&bullet; enable a reasonable and adequate standard of care to be
  provided;

&bullet; ensure equity for financially disadvantaged people;

&bullet; reinforce the emphasis on encouraging maintenance of
  individual independ+ence;

&bullet; achieve greater equity between States on per capita
  expenditure;

&bullet; be cost-effective for the taxpayer; and

&bullet; create incentives for service providers to increase
  administrative efficiency.

  There is general acknowledgment that existing financial
arrangements fall short of the Commonwealth's aims in a number
of areas. In particular, the following concerns are raised by
the Auditor-General's report on an efficiency audit, the report
of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Expenditure (McLeay) and the report by the Senate Select
Committee on Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes (Giles):

&bullet; The overall funding system exacerbates the differences
  between hostels and nursing homes by consistently increasing
  the differential between benefits for personal care in hostels
  and ordinary care in nursing homes.

&bullet; Funding arrangements provide no encouragement for
  rehabilitation or for maintenance of personal independence.

&bullet; The existing fees control system is complex, costly and
  difficult to administer. Fees relate to real levels of
  expenditure but not to real costs of care, and vary widely from
  nursing home to nursing home and State to State. This
  interstate variation results in substantial per capita
  inequities in benefits paid from one State to another.

&bullet; There are serious anomalies in arrangements controlling
  profits, which the industry is increasingly less prepared to
  tolerate.

&bullet; There is little incentive for proprietors to limit operating
  costs as costs incurred are returned as fee increases. Savings
  on approved costs cannot be retained and are reflected in
  negative loadings on fees.

&bullet; The existing nexus between costs, fees and benefits, and the
  difficulty over time in relating fee increases to real cost
  movements, has severely reduced the Commonwealth's capacity to
  control overall expenditure on nursing homes. This problem is
  escalating. The tables on current and projected expenditure in
  Chapter Two illustrate this problem.

&bullet; Commonwealth expenditure per bed day is higher for deficit-
  financed homes than for participating homes. But Commonwealth
  policy priorities, concerning access to nursing homes for
  disadvantaged groups, are no more likely to be met by deficit-
  financed homes than by participating homes, despite the
  additional expenditure incurred.
  The clear conclusion of all these reports, which is
supported by government policy statements, is that the large
amounts of scarce resources expended through residential
programs must be directed only to those aged or disabled people
whose needs are not able to be met through community-based care
services. Despite the huge investment of resources, residential
programs in fact cater for only a small minority of aged and
disabled people and no matter how well structured or co-
ordinated the programs, they will continue to be appropriate
for only a minority.
  The central divergence in the conclusions of the major
reports concerns the degree of Commonwealth involvement in the
program over the longer term. The McLeay report recommended a
progressive transfer of responsibility to the States, for both
residential and community care, while the Giles report
specifically rejected grants to the States in favour of program
grants administered by the Common+wealth. The Review believes
that the priority is to enhance the effectiveness of the
current programs and their linkages with community services and
that issues relating to longer term control cannot be
determined at present.

<h> Approaches to funding </h>

On the basis of the stated objectives and the conclusions of
the major reports on current problems, there are three major
elements which need to be taken into account in devising new
funding arrangements for residential programs:

&bullet; The new system must incorporate budgetary controls over the
  funding of nursing home benefits and assistance. Under present
  open-ended arrange+ments the rate of growth in outlays is very
  difficult to control or to predict beyond a narrow timeframe.

&bullet; The system must address current administrative complexities;
  funding ine+quities between different types of institutions and
  between States which result in significant per capita
  inequities across the program; and the existing disincentives
  for provider efficiency.

&bullet; The new arrangements must support the proposed restructuring
  of service provision and be consistent with the broad goals of
  providing a continuum of care and discouraging premature
  institutionalisation, while allowing greater flexibility in
  planning for future rapid growth in the aged population.

  However, while there is broad agreement on the importance
of these elements in any new funding arrangements, there is no
clear-cut strategy for achieving them. The number and variety
of proposals put forward over the years have been great, but
taken in isolation most of them have adverse consequences of
varying magnitude. This has been a major deterrent to change.
Essentially, these proposals relate to four central issues
which are discussed below:

&bullet; the continuation of growth control;

&bullet; the nexus between costs, fees and benefits;

&bullet; protection for financially disadvantaged persons; and

&bullet; improvement of program efficiency within the existing   
  structure.

<h> The continuation of growth control </h>

Control on the overall number of nursing home beds, by limiting
supply, has been the most effective device used by the
Commonwealth to date for controlling costs and reducing
unnecessary admissions. At present, this is done by
controlling, through a series of planning principles, the
number of beds approved for benefit; and by prohibiting non-
approved beds in approved homes. However, restricting supply
also:

&bullet; encourages fee increases, and hence pressure on benefits;

&bullet; cannot ensure priority of access to highly dependent persons
  most in need of nursing care; and

&bullet; is subject to demand pressures. 

  To be successful, it depends on:

&bullet; means for protecting financially disadvantaged people   
  (currently fees control); and

&bullet; admission control (currently control over the kinds of   
  people approved for benefit, but not the number).

  Removal of controls on bed growth and on approval of beds
for benefit, on the other hand, would result in an excess
supply of beds. This would:

&bullet; allow nursing homes to compete for patients;

&bullet; encourage provider efficiency and protect standards; and

&bullet; restrain fee increases, allowing the lifting of controls
  on fees.

  It would depend for expenditure control on restricting the
number of people approved for benefit. This has always proven
extremely difficult. Experience in the health industry
indicates that all beds would be likely to be fully occupied,
causing:

&bullet; pressure to procure benefits for all people admitted,     
  leading to encouragement of increasing dependency and      
  institutionalisation, and discouragement of rehabilitation;

&bullet; increasing difficulty for people to be approved for benefit
  directly from the community, without a preliminary admission
  period in which they received no benefit; and

&bullet; increasing admission of better-off people who could afford
  to pay fees in the initial non-benefit period, at the     
  expense of people who were financially disadvantaged.

  To be successful and meet wider Commonwealth aims for
enhanced rehabilitation and the prevention of unnecessary
institutionalisation, this form of deregulation would depend
on:

&bullet; means for protecting financially disadvantaged persons;

&bullet; a way to ensure that people who do not need nursing care are
  not prematurely admitted to nursing homes as a preliminary
  to claiming benefit; and

&bullet; a way of protecting assessment mechanisms from bearing the
  full brunt of expenditure control, when their major concern
  is to make judgments about patient care requirements.

  The Review considers that the disadvantages of the removal
of controls on bed growth significantly outweigh the
advantages.

The nexus between fees, costs and benefits

The Commonwealth provides assistance to nursing home residents
so that everyone who needs this form of care can have access
to it, regardless of their means. Because 62-65 per cent of
residents are pensioners with little or no other income,
Commonwealth assistance, with the minimum patient contribution,
must be sufficient to cover the basic costs of an adequate and
reasonable standard of care for at least two-thirds of
residents.

  The present fee control system allows the Commonwealth to
protect pensioners in participating nursing homes who have
little or no other income, by striking a benefit which, with
the minimum patient contribution, covers the fees charged for
70 per cent of these beds, at the commencement of the benefit
period. In Victoria and South Australia this system does not
apply in 1986, and the proportions of participating home
residents covered at the commencement of the benefit period
were 62 and 67 per cent respectively.

  The starting point for determining benefits under this
system is the fees charged by individual nursing homes, which
in turn are approved by the Commonwealth on the basis of
allowable costs, plus a profit component. Interstate
differences are perpetuated in the range of benefit levels from
State to State. The benefit is then, essentially, a form of
cost reimbursement, rather than a payment in respect of
provision of an approved standard of care. An additional
problem is that the present system does not differentiate the
real costs of ordinary and extensive levels of care. Thus, the
approved daily fees for any participating nursing home are
always based on the total per diem income of the home divided
by the number of beds, and the differential between ordinary
and extensive care fees is always the standard $6 per day
regardless of the cost structure of the home.

  The main advantage of breaking the nexus between costs, fees
and benefits would be that benefits could be standardised and
could be determined by some other means more consistent with
Commonwealth aims to:

&bullet; control expenditure growth;

&bullet; achieve greater equity between States; and

&bullet; reflect the actual costs of ordinary and extensive nursing
  care for residents with different levels of dependency.

  In effect, such a change would be consistent with the
introduction of program grants. The essential features of
program grants are that participating organisa+tions agree to
provide a specified level of service in return for receiving
a specified level of grant, and a specified level of patient
contribution. The advantages of such a system are its
administrative simplicity and the incentives it provides for
efficient management by proprietors of nursing homes. The main
problem is that it assumes that all nursing homes could be
operated within a common cost structure, irrespective of size,
location, age etc. In practical terms, the difficulty in
introducing program grants, or simply setting benefits in some
way other than on approved fees, lies in the basis on which the
grant should be calculated.

  The W.D. Scott study on the Cost of nursing home and hostel
care services (Scott, 1985) explores the notion of standard
costs in developing program grants - standard costs being
expressed as the number of units of input required to produce
a unit of output. In the nursing home context, output measures
for deriving standard costs would be the level of patient care
deemed reasonable and adequate by the Commonwealth for ordinary
and extensive care residents.

  W.D. Scott pointed to two approaches to developing standard
costs:
&bullet; The first of these would develop standard costs from      
  existing costs. This assumes the existence of a consistent 
  service level, and hence a similar cost structure across  
  nursing homes. For instance, if there were consistent     
  service levels for food and linen services, then a standard 
  cost could be struck, based on existing costs for these   
  services.

&bullet; The second approach would base standard costs on an      
  independent point of reference. Thus, the Commonwealth would
  specify a standard output for all aspects of service such
  as nursing hours per patient, food and laundry services,  
  light and heat etc. and define the levels of input required
  to meet these standards.

  W.D. Scott preferred the second approach, concluding that
there was insufficient consistency in existing costs to
generate standard costs. However, they recommended a phased
introduction to program grants:

&bullet; Phase I would use current average costs as an interim model
  for deriving the standard cost for various aspects of     
  nursing home operations. During this period, homes varying substantially from the average would be identified and the range of costs gradually compressed.

</sample>



<sample><id> H03 </id>

<note> 2021 words </note>

<source> Ethical and legal issues in guardianship options for intellectually
disadvantaged people </source>

<bl> By Dr Terry Carney and Prof Peter Singer </bl>

<h> Chapter Five </h>

<h> Options in caring for and protecting intellectually
disadvantaged people </h>

<h> INTRODUCTION </h>

In Chapter One two competing goals in the care and protection
of intellectually disadvantaged persons (on the one hand,
maximising the freedom of the individual, and on the other
hand, protecting the welfare of the individual) were discussed.
Most programs for the intellectually disadvantaged attempt to
steer a middle course between these goals. There are several
ways of doing this, and the course chosen determines, in a
rough way, the relative weight to be accorded to each goal.
This chapter commences a more detailed discussion of
guardianship schemes, both existing and proposed.
    There are two questions to be addressed in discussing
guardianship alternatives. First, what type or model of
guardianship is to be preferred? Second, what sort of
administrative delivery structure should underpin the
preference for a particular model of guardianship? The first
question involves choosing between three models:

&bullet; a legalistic or `substituted judgment' model which aims to
  facilitate only a person's legal functioning in the community;
&bullet; a welfare oriented or therapeutic model which strives to
  bring a wider range of benefits to the person; and
&bullet; a `parent-child' or developmental model which aims to promote
  the development of the individual's functioning in a range of
  areas.
    The second question involves choosing from volunteers backed
up by a co-ordinating agency, social work professionals
employed by a public or private agency, and an agency which may
seek guardianship but whose prime function is the delivery of
social services.
    Some delivery structures may be capable of delivering more than
one type of guardianship, but there are inherent limitations
which will emerge from the discussion which follows. In his
discussion of models for guardianship, McLaughlin notes that
the conflicting internal logics of the various solutions seem
to make it impossible to form a hybrid model of the best
aspects of each. 
    The field of choice is also narrowed by some practical
considerations and by the impact of principles such as that of
the least restrictive alternative.
    Some parents, for example, suggest that the law should
`automatically' continue their guardianship rights when their
handicapped offspring reach adulthood. The insuperable 
practical barrier to such a scheme is that of classification;
intellectually disadvantaged people cannot readily be
identified by their behaviour, by their history of utilisation
of specialist services, or from any public records. Most people
will not classify themselves or be universally regarded by
their close family as being disadvantaged to the degree which
would justify appointment of someone as their guardian. Even
where this identity is established, it will not generally be
known to any public agency. And where an agency does have a
record - such as would be the case where services have been
supplied to assist in say the education of a disadvantaged 
child prior to adulthood - it does not follow that all (or 
indeed any) of these people require guardianship. This is 
really the nub of the matter, for it squarely raises the 
question of policy.   
    Assuming for the moment that the class of people to be
covered could somehow be established with precision (and
precise it must be if the law is not to have the effect of
stripping competent non-disadvantaged adults of `self
guardianship'), there would still be the question of the
application of the principle of the least restrictive
alternative. For automatic guardianship would, at worst, be
plenary guardianship or, at best, over-generous guardianship.
One cannot tailor a suit for a client whose measurements and
needs remain unknown; equally, it is not possible to limit the
powers of the guardian to the bare essentials necessary for
that person if the law is required to be `automatic' in its
operations. Guardianship would inevitably be of the `off the
peg' variety; and it would be manufactured to accommodate the
client whose needs were the most extensive. In place of least
restrictive guardianship we would be ushering in a `most
restrictive' guardianship regime; it would automatically
appoint guardians for people who do not require them, and it
would clothe many guardians with powers substantially in excess
of that required to meet the needs of the particular
disadvantaged person. 
    This chapter puts such impractical schemes to one side and
concentrates attention on those guardianship options which are
both workable and consistent with the basic guiding principles
laid down in such documents as the United Nations Declaration.
The models to be explored here result from a serious attempt
to devise workable models which are broadly consistent with
these guiding principles. One of the fundamental questions
which must, however, be addressed in this context is whether
limited guardianship should be made available. This matter is
also considered in this chapter.

<h> THE LEGALISTIC OR `SUBSTITUTED JUDGEMENT' MODEL </h>
<h> Introduction </h>

McLaughlin and Frolik both acknowledge that the expressions
`legalistic' and `substituted judgment' may be used to describe
the same model for guardianship. The following discussion uses
the expression `legalistic' wherever possible, in order to
avoid confusion.
    McLaughlin commences his discussion of the legalistic model
of guardianship by quoting the following definition of
guardianship: 

    The term `guardianship' refers to a legally recognised
    relationship between a specified competent adult and another
    specified person, the `ward' who, because of his tender age or
    because of some significant degree of mental disability,
    judicially verified, is considered to lack legal capacity to
    exercise some or all of the rights pertaining to adults
    generally in the country of which he is a citizen. The guardian
    is specifically charged with protecting his ward's interests
    and, for certain purposes, exercising essential rights on his
    behalf.

    This definition, says McLaughlin, makes it clear that
guardianship is essentially a legal device by which:

i)  the exercise of certain rights is transferred from one
    person who lacks mental capacity to another person with legal
    capacity, and 
ii) certain duties of protection are imposed on the person to
    whom the rights are transferred.

    In other words, the guardian becomes a `substitute
decision-maker' for the person subject to the guardianship, and
is given legal responsibility for the protection of that
person.
    What group of intellectually disadvantaged people does the
substituted judgment model of guardianship address?
    McLaughlin has identified three broad groups in relation
to which the question of a need for guardianship might arise.
The first group includes severely and profoundly intellectually
disadvantaged individuals, among others, who have a need for
valid consents to be given to medical procedures and other
forms of treatment, therapy and rehabilitation, and for
assistance in matters of day-to-day living, because they do not
have the mental capacity to understand the information that
underlies the validity of consents. This group most clearly
requires guardianship to enable its members to interact legally
with the world, and its members frequently require protection
as well since they are very dependent upon others for even
basic life functions. They have extremely limited communication
skills, paid human service workers are often the only people
aware of their existence, and they are often housed in
institutional settings where individual needs give way to
institutional maintenance.
    The other two groups identified by McLaughlin are: those
mildly and moderately intellectually disadvantaged persons who
do have the mental capacity for forming legal relationships,
but who exercise that capacity in a way that is perceived by
other people as not being in their best interests, probably
because they just cannot keep pace with the demands of modern
life; and those intellectually disadvantaged adults who are in
situations where there is a risk of physical, sexual or
economic abuse or exploitation from which they are unable or
unwilling to extricate themselves.
    The legalistic model addresses neither of these groups.
Members of the former group primarily require guidance and
counselling. However, proponents of the legalistic model argue
that guardianship is not an appropriate vehicle for the
provision of such services, because they can be provided
without the imposition of authority and resultant restriction
of rights that guardianship entails. Guardianship according to
the legalistic model is not a social service; it should only
be used where a substitute decision-maker is needed to
facilitate legal relationships.
    In relation to the latter `at risk' group, McLaughlin
argues that guardianship should not be used to deal with issues
of neglect, abuse or exploitation, and recommends that society
should be more ready to make use of criminal sanctions against
those responsible for such situations. After all, that is how
people are normally protected in our society. 
    The legalistic model for guardianship is based on the
presumption that everybody is entitled to exercise all the
rights generally available to all persons within the
jurisdiction.  Thus it has been said that:

    ... every human being should be presumed to have [the basic
    rights of privacy established by the Supreme Court of the
    United States] unless someone can show an almost certain
    probability of disastrous consequences if he exercises them ...
    There is a fundamental right to be left alone, a right to be
    allowed to succeed or fail, a right to ignore gratuitous
    advice, a right not to tell every problem to the social worker
    and a right not to answer the door.

    Persons who lack sufficient mental capacity to participate
intellectually in certain legal acts, such as the giving of a
consent which waives the right not to be touched by another
person, may not engage in these legal acts. This is a serious
deprivation of the legal right of such people, but McLaughlin
argues that it is necessary `if the enforcement of legal
relationships is to have any moral foundation'. 
    The dangers of over-protection have already been referred
to. One way of avoiding them is to make use of limited or
partial guardianship schemes. This form of guardianship is
discussed in more detail later in this chapter. The main aim
is to take away legal decision-making power only in those areas
of a person's life in which he/she has been found to lack legal
competence. It is a sophisticated modification of traditional
guardianship schemes, and is directed towards implementation
of the principle of the least restrictive alternative. With its
emphasis on legal functioning, it would fit in well with the
legalistic model.
    The legalistic model seeks to deal with the dangers of
over-protection and abuse of control by restricting the size
of the group on which guardianship may be imposed and the
purposes for which it may be used. According to McLaughlin, the
appointment of a guardian under the legalistic model is
effected by a court in a juridical proceeding, and the guardian
is personally subject to the supervision of the court. 
However, in recent times there has been support for
guardianship tribunals composed of experts in the field of
intellectual impairment and incompetence, and chaired by
lawyers, to be placed in charge of guardianships.  If the
principles of the legalistic approach to guardianship were set
out in the enabling legislation as goals for which such a
tribunal should strive, there seems to be no reason why it
could not administer a legalistic type of guardianship.
    Because of the serious deprivation of legal rights under
guardianship, proponents of the legalistic model argue strongly
for extensive due process and evidentiary safeguards in order
to minimise infringement of the rights of persons who are
capable of exercising legal rights themselves. Such arguments
accord with the views expressed in paragraph 7 of the
Declaration on the rights of mentally retarded persons. 
    In theory, there are two main possible effects of extending
due process and increasing evidentiary standards. First, there
might be a decrease in the number of cases in which a guardian
is unnecessarily appointed. This is obviously a good effect,
because it reduces the number of people who are unjustly
deprived of their liberty. Second, there might be an increase
in the number of cases where no guardian is appointed although
one is necessary for the welfare of some person. This may be
a bad effect. However, advocates of the legalistic approach
believe that the good effect outweighs the bad, on the basis
that we are all better off in a society which minimises the
denial of liberty to its members. 

</sample>



<sample><id> H04 </id>

<note> 2002 words </note>

<source> Passenger coach safety: report of the House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Transport Safety  </source>

<h> CHAPTER THREE </h>
<h> MECHANICAL SAFETY </h>

<h> Introduction </h>

55.      Claims have been made that the strong competition in
the coach industry has resulted in a reduction in the
mechanical safety of vehicles. However, the entry of new 
operators between 1980 and 1984 has resulted in a substantial
reduction in the age profile of the express coach fleet, which
has served to improve the overall standard of mechanical
safety. The major long established operators have undertaken
major fleet upgrading with the purchase of new coaches during
1984. Before the entry of the new operators the established
operators were running older fleets, with the average age of
coaches used by one operator being around 10 to 12 years. The
average fleet age at the end of 1984 was about 2 to 3 years.

56.      Design standards for buses are specified by Australian
Design Rules (ADRs) and Consolidated Draft Regulations (CDRs),
which are formulated by the Australian Transport Advisory
Council (ATAC). ADRs are national mandatory standards for all
new buses while CDRs are used by States and Territories as a
model for their individual regulations. ADRs specify
technically complex standards for safety features or for the
control of motor vehicle emissions and noise. Laboratory
procedures are required in order to test for compliance with
ADRs.

57.      It is felt that with some exceptions existing design
standards provide a relatively high level of passenger
protection, apart from a few deficiencies in the matters of
seating, brakes, tyres and roll-over strength which will be
discussed later in this chapter.

58.      Some concern was raised during the Inquiry as to the
standard of imported buses. It was claimed that some states
will register these vehicles without a compliance plate and
that many vehicles are falling short of current safety
standards. All imported buses, including second hand vehicles,
should meet current ADRs at the time of importation. It is
essential that all imported buses are assessed for compliance
with current ADRs before customs clearance and that compliance
regulations be strictly enforced by the vehicle registration
authorities. The Committee recommends that:

	the Minister for Industry, Technology and Commerce 
	ensure that all imported trucks and buses, including 
	second hand vehicles, meet current Australian Design 
	Rules at the time of importation.

<h> Tyres </h>

59.      Tyres are vital to the safe operation of all road
vehicles. It is essential that the use of sub-standard tyres
does not jeopardise the safety of the vehicle. Tyres can be
sub-standard because of poor manufacture or design,
inappropriate*inappropiate use or simply wear and tear.

60.      Adequate standards are needed for new vehicle tyres.
At present there is no ADR for tyres on new heavy vehicles,
including buses. The only tyre standards for buses are those
set down in the CDRs, which specify only very general
requirements. The need for an ADR for commercial vehicle tyres
is currently under review.

61.      The Road Safety Committee's 1977 Report on Heavy
Vehicle Safety recommended that a program of research be
implemented with a view to the drafting of an ADR on heavy
vehicle tyres. The Government accepted this recommendation in
broad principle but indicated that the Advisory Committee on
Safety in Vehicle Design (ACSVD) had advised that because of
the expense of research programs an analysis of truck accident
data was needed to identify the problem areas before a research
program could be recommended. It would appear that this long-
term project has not been completed.

62.      While ADRs can regulate tyres on new vehicles they
cannot be used to ensure the quality of replacement tyres.
Controlling replacement tyres, not only for buses but for all
vehicles, is at least as important as a mandatory standard for
original tyres.

63.      The Federal Office of Road Safety supports the
introduction of an ADR for tyres on heavy vehicles and a
control mechanism for replacement tyres. Although the Committee
is not aware of any deficiencies in new tyres for these
vehicles it feels that to ensure performance characteristics
of tyres an ADR is warranted. The Committee therefore reaffirms
the conclusions from the Heavy Vehicle Report and recommends
that:

    (a) the Minister for Transport seek the cooperation of the
	States and Territories through the Australian Transport
	Advisory Council to prepare standards in the form of an
	Australian Design Rule for heavy vehicle tyres.

    (b) the Minister for Transport and the Attorney-General ensure
	that all tyre standards in Australian Design Rules be
	incorporated in a Product Safety Standard under the Trade
	Practices Act.

This latter recommendation would include car tyres as well as
heavy vehicle tyres.

64.      Ensuring the quality of new tyres through mandatory
standards is administratively easier than the next step, which
is ensuring that tyres are replaced when they become
unserviceable through wear and tear. Heavy vehicle tyres should
be safe when operated within their recommended service
limitations. It has been suggested that the most effective way
to avoid accidents due to tyre failure would be for regulatory
authorities to ensure that vehicle users maintain and operate
tyres according to the manufacturers' recommendations,
particularly those standards recommended by the Australian Tyre
and Rim Association.

65.      One TWU witness claimed that replacing new tyres on
vehicles with older, worn tyres is a common practice within the
industry. He claimed that a "baldy back dual-wheel tyre would
be put on the inside where it could not be seen". However,
these claims were contradicted by several other drivers. One
driver who had been employed by one company for 6.5 years and
who drove about 9,000 kms a week, told the Committee that he
had experienced only one blowout during this time. Other
drivers said that the number of skids, flat tyres or blowouts
that they had encountered during their driving careers had been
minimal. One operator advised that only new tyres were fitted
as replacement tyres as these were more economic than retreads.
Although the Committee was provided with no evidence to support
the views expressed by the TWU it is nevertheless concerned
that replacement tyres are not regulated.

66.      The Road Safety Committee's 1980 Report on Tyre Safety
concluded that tyres are a causative factor in only a
relatively small proportion of accidents in Australia, while
at the same time commenting on the inadequacy of the available
data. It was suggested that tyres may play a more important
role in accidents than existing data generally suggest.

67.      To ensure that sub-standard tyres are not being used
on vehicles, and thereby reducing safety, it is important that
there are mechanisms available to monitor the standards of
tyres in use.

This is only possible through inspection procedures. Random
inspections are the most effective way of detecting the use of
worn or otherwise substandard tyres. Tyres can become
unserviceable between registration inspections. It is also
possible that inspections at the time of vehicle registration
may not detect such tyres as operators would have the
opportunity of removing these tyres and replacing them with
newer ones. Some witnesses claimed that such practices do in
fact take place. If there is any truth to these allegations,
a strong system of random inspections would detect those
operators using unroadworthy tyres on vehicles. This is
particularly necessary for commercial vehicles, such as
coaches, travelling large distances between registration
inspections.

<h> Brakes </h>

68.      Since July 1980 the braking of buses has been
specified by ADR 35A, which is based largely on USA
regulations. Buses first registered before 1980 may not comply
with ADR 35A. However, a major review of heavy vehicle braking
is currently being undertaken by VSAC, which is assessing the
suitability of the latest Economic Commission for Europe (ECE)
braking regulations for their adoption as the ADR for braking.

69.      There have been significant developments in heavy
vehicle braking systems in recent years. More sophisticated
systems such as the anti-lock braking system (ABS) developed
by Mercedes Benz have been shown to significantly improve the
performance of heavy vehicles when braking. Road tests have
shown that the ABS greatly increases vehicle control in all
driving conditions and reduces stopping distances and skidding.
The ABS and other developments in braking should be looked at
closely in formulating a new ADR.

70.      The Heavy Vehicle Safety Report in 1977 recommended
that consideration should be given to making auxiliary braking
a requirement on all buses which may be used on long distance
touring. Although auxiliary braking for coaches has not been
made mandatory, most coaches have some form of auxiliary
braking fitted, such as an exhaust*exhuast brake. The Committee
was told that there would not be many vehicles operating
without such braking systems.

71.      The NRFII similarly concluded that immediate attention
be given to the fitting of auxiliary braking systems, further
reinforcing the conclusion reached by the Heavy Vehicle Report
in 1977. Requiring all buses to be fitted with auxiliary*auxilliary
braking will not be a burden to the industry. Making auxiliary*auxilliary
braking mandatory will require that they be kept in working
order.

72.      The Committee recommends that:

	the Minister for Transport seek the cooperation of the
	Australian Transport Advisory Council to give immediate
	consideration to making auxiliary braking systems mandatory 
	for all heavy vehicles.

<h> Structural strength </h>

73.      In Australia there are no statutory requirements for
the structural strength of the body and chassises*chasses of buses. The
main reason for this appears to be the high cost which would
be involved in determining a standard, which of course involves
crash testing of vehicles. The roll-over strength of buses is
receiving considerable attention in Europe, but as yet there
is no clear definition of appropriate standards. Most witnesses
agreed that Australia should await the conclusion of overseas
research and the resulting requirements because of the very
high cost which is involved in this research.

74.      At present structural strength is determined basically
by calculation and by a certain amount of rig testing. Although
there is no crash testing, sections of vehicles are destroyed
to enable the estimation of the general strength of a body as
a complete body.

75.      The Committee was told that Australian coaches are
more strongly constructed than those in Europe because of the
more damaging effects of many Australian roads on buses. It was
stated that there is "no doubt that the roll-over strength of
Australian buses would be better than those constructed in
Europe".

76.      Although the Committee does not question this
statement, it is concerned that there are no standards or codes
of practice in Australia to ensure that the roll-over strength
of buses is adequate. While there is a need for a standard to
be determined, the Committee realises that there would be
problems in having a standard which was incompatible with those
in other relevant countries or which requires impact testing
for compliance. While any delay in the implementation of a
suitable standard should be avoided, the Committee recognises
the advantages of waiting for the European standard. However,
it is also important that the standards developed overseas will
be suited to the different conditions experienced by vehicles
in Australia. The Committee recommends that:

	the Minister for Transport in cooperation with the
	Australian Transport Advisory Council:

	(a) monitor European developments on standards for 
	    bus roll-over strength to assess their suitability 
	    for adoption in Australia.

	(b) develop and implement as soon as possible an Australian
	    Design Rule setting standards for bus roll-over strength.

<h> Seating </h>

77.      The importance of strong seat anchorages and seat
structures in buses is self-evident, however, design
deficiencies in this area have been noted by several witnesses.

78.      The 1977 Heavy Vehicle Safety Report drew attention
to the practice by which some bus seats are secured to the
plywood floor with bolts which would pull out at a load of
about 100kg. In a minor front-end accident it was alleged that
all the seats in the bus would pull out from the floor. As well
as not restraining passengers, the seat anchorage fittings
would then be in a position*postition to cause injury to
passengers.

79.      A study on seating requirements revealed relatively
low levels of energy absorption in the tests conducted on seats
being fitted to Australian buses at that time. 

</sample>




<sample><id> H05 </id>

<note> 2030 words </note>

<source> An investigation of Tasmanian freight equalisation scheme assistance rates </source>

<h> CHAPTER 7 PRINCIPAL FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS </h>

1. The nature of this investigation was such that most of the
fundamental evidence and other material provided to the
Commission was confidential in a commercial sense. Many
submittors sought directions prohibiting the publication of
evidence submitted to the Commission and of matters contained
in documents lodged with it, in accordance with the provisions
of s. 12(2)(b) of the Inter-State Commission Act 1975 (Cth).
All such applications were granted. Two consequences followed:
first, the Commission is satisfied that the information it
gained, and which was necessary to enable it to make relevant
findings of fact, was more comprehensive than otherwise would
have been the case; second, the Commission has not been able
to make public certain facts which support its conclusions, and
in some factual matters there is a resultant apparent lack of
precision and clarity. Nevertheless, the Commission made the
confidentiality directions because it was satisfied that it was
desirable to do so in the public interest, irrespective of the
effect on the overt comprehensiveness of its report.

2. As stated in Chapter 2, the Commission placed a strict
interpretation on its terms of reference, which it considers
are confined to a comparison between the existing level of the
interstate freight cost disadvantage experienced by shippers
of non-bulk goods between Tasmania and the mainland of
Australia and the level of the disadvantage that prevailed when
the new Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme was introduced
on 1 September 1985. In making this comparison, the Commission
confined its investigation to an analysis of changes in freight
charges.

     A number of submittors raised issues which were extraneous
to the Commission's terms of reference as so interpreted: in
public advertisements (see Appendix I) it was stated; `It [the
Commission] will not be considering any policy, procedural or
administrative changes to the scheme'. Some of the extraneous
issues raised are mentioned in section 2.2 of this report, in
which the Commission has emphasised that inadequate or
inefficient methods of presenting cargoes for shipment are the
responsibility of freight forwarders and shippers, who should
not seek to rely on increased assistance payments as a solution
to problems which are within their own ability to remedy.

     As recommended in its original report, the Commission
considers that the establishment of a Tasmanian Association for
Interstate Shippers is desirable in order to assist in the
adoption of a coordinated approach to resolving the many
problems that exist for coastal shipping services.

3. In Chapter 3 the Commission has re-stated in summary form
the basic rationale of the Scheme which it recommended in its
1985 report. In particular, geographical factors such as the
distance between the place of production or manufacture and the
ultimate destination cannot in themselves justify assistance
payments. Fundamental to the existing Scheme is the concept
that the disadvantage `begins at a northern Tasmanian port' and
`ends at Melbourne', and vice versa. The Commission also has
re-stated, in section 3.3, the major factors which create the
freight cost disadvantage.

     In Chapter 3 attention has been directed to the fact that
this review is based solely on a comparison of relevant freight
charges, on the assumption that there has not been any significant 
change in the underlying causes of the freight cost disadvantage. 
Such a course is obviously appropriate in the short term, but in 
the longer term it is likely that reappraisal of the fundamental 
basis of the Scheme will be necessary in the light of changes 
which are likely to occur, with differing consequences, in the 
three relevant transport modes: sea, road and rail.

4. Chapter 4 contains a summary of the operation of the revised
Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme. In the first ten months
of the current financial year payments made under the old
Scheme and the new Scheme totalled $21.12 million. There have,
however, been some delays in the payment of claims, due
primarily to lack of familiarity on the part of claimants and
Department of Transport staff with the new documentation and
administrative procedures which became operative from 1
September 1985.

      In section 4.3, there is a discussion of the practical
result of the application of discounting of payments to large
shippers, which was recommended by the Commission in its March
1985 report. The Department of Transport has estimated that the
discounts will total approximately $1.5 million in 1985-86. The
discounting system is also referred to in section 2.2 of this
report.

5. In Chapter 5 are described the changes that have taken place
in Bass Strait shipping services since January 1985. Without
doubt, there is excess ship capacity at all ports. Evidence
presented to the Commission revealed a great variation in
estimates of the extent of this excess capacity. The Commission
considers that the most appropriate basis for such estimates
is physical operational capacity, and it has concluded that on
such a basis the extent of excess capacity is approximately
30-40 per cent.

6. In Chapter 6, the Commission presents its findings as a
result of its investigation of sea freight charges for
shipments across Bass Strait and mainland road and rail freight
charges in the period March 1985 to March 1986. The Commission
found that actual sea freight charges paid did not change
significantly between March 1985 and March 1986, except in the
case of trailers and pantechnicons, for which there was an
average decrease of 25 per cent.

     Estimates of increases in interstate road freight charges
varied between 3.9 and 7 per cent. In the case of rail freight,
estimates of increases in charges varied between 9 and 15.5 per
cent, with an average of 10.5 per cent.

7. The Commission is in no doubt that when the changes in Bass
Strait shipping services occurred (see Chapter 5), there was
a general expectation that the competition thereby engendered
would result in significant decreases in Bass Strait shipping
charges. It has been established that these expectations have
not been realised, at least at this stage.

     Clear evidence exists of a loss of trade as between some
shipping operators and, because of excess capacity (see section
5.3), a situation could soon arise in which a service will be
curtailed or withdrawn.

     There was strong consensus among the principal witnesses
that at this stage it would be premature to make any judgment
about the levels of freight charges because there has not been
sufficient time for a clear picture to emerge following the
recent changes in services. The Commission is satisfied that
this is a correct assessment.

     In most cases, published freight charge schedules are of
little relevance because their application is minimal. But one
operator said such schedules are a benchmark, and that `there
are many people who do pay the rates that are published in the
tariff'. By contrast, a witness for another shipping operator
said his company did not publicly issue a schedule of freight
charges.

     The operations manager of Union Bulkships said it would
be `extremely difficult' to estimate the difference between
published charges and so-called special charges. His evidence
was as follows:

     ... prior to 24 February [1986] it probably would not have been
     more than about 5 per cent, and that was the last freight
     increase. Since our last freight increase we have not been able
     to gain all the increases we sought and, in fact, in some
     instances we have had to reduce rates to combat prices that
     have been put in by the opposition. In fact, at the moment it
     would be fair to say that the trade in Tasmania is in a state
     of flux as regards rate structures ... On that special schedule
     you will notice that there are a number of rates which we are
     still in the process of negotiating with shippers because there
     is a situation at the moment where the trade is over-tonnaged
     and people are taking advantage of that over-tonnaging
     situation to resist freight increases, which is probably the
     simplest way of saying it.

     The evidence reveals that an unusual situation has
developed in Bass Strait services, whereby in most cases there
is specific negotiation of freight charges, either on an ad hoc
basis or, especially in the case of large shippers, by formal
agreement. Some witnesses described the situation in Bass
Strait as a `price war', but this was doubted by other
witnesses.

     One feature of current competition in the market is that
evidence has been given to the Commission of effective shipper
resistance to announced increases in freight charges; further,
there is evidence that in many cases charges are being
contained, even where costs have risen, apparently to avoid
loss of trade to a competitor.

     A number of witnesses used the words `fluidity' and
`instability' to describe the current structure of freight
charges. Most witnesses were of the opinion that an appropriate
time for a further investigation of the levels of freight
charges would be towards the end of 1987. The Commission agrees
with this view. By that time, two significant events will have
occurred.

     First, on 15 February 1985 the Transport Commission of
Tasmania entered into an agreement with Brambles Holdings
Limited. The preamble of this agreement was as follows:

     A. the Commission has for some time been operating the vessel
	M.V. "Straitsman" in connection with the conduct of shipping
	services between places within Tasmania and between Tasmania
	and other parts of the Commonwealth;

     B. Brambles desire to operate a cargo vessel in the provision
	of shipping services between Victoria and Tasmania and has
	purchased a vessel for that purpose with a view to assessing
	the requirements for the ultimate replacement of the M.V.
	"Straitsman";

     C. the Commission and Brambles have agreed to associate
	themselves in the provision of a Joint Bass Strait Cargo
	Shipping Operation serving Victoria, King Island and Tasmania
	using initially M.V. "Straitsman" and a vessel to be provided
	by Brambles.

     The agreement was for an initial term of two years from
the `commencement date', which is defined as `the date upon
which the Brambles vessel actually sails upon its first
voyage...'. This date was 1 July 1985.

     Paragraph 2.3 of the agreement makes the following
provision:

     This Agreement shall be for an initial term of two years from
     the commencement date and may be terminated at the expiration
     of such term by either party giving to the other at least 6
     months written notice in advance of its intention to do so. If
     not so terminated this Agreement shall continue in force after
     the initial term until such time as either party gives to the
     other six months notice in writing.

Paragraph 11.1 of the agreement is in the following terms:

     The Parties AGREE that prior to the expiration of one year from
     the Commencement Date they will evaluate and consult one with
     the other regarding the continuation of the Operation and the
     continuing use of the Vessels or their replacement with the aim
     of ensuring that any replacement arrangements provide for the
     continuation of a regular and scheduled cargo shipping service
     to the Port of Grassy.

     The Commission understands that the review contemplated
by paragraph 11.1 of the agreement has commenced, although not
on a formal basis. It will include options for the future of
the Straitsman, but decisions are not likely to be publicly
announced before 30 June 1987.

     For a considerable time there has been doubt whether it
was nautically practicable for the Challenger B, the vessel
used by Brambles on the Burnie-Melbourne service, to trade to
King Island. In evidence to the Commission, the general manager
of Brambles Shipping Division stated unequivocally that, after
lengthy investigation, it had been decided to make no attempt
to use the Challenger B for the King Island service.

     The second significant event which will occur in a little
more than one year is, so the Commission understands, the
negotiation of new contracts by a major shipper. The results
of such negotiations may well change the attitudes of some
shipping operators to the economics of continuing their
services. 

Firm evidence was given by some witnesses that if, for example, one vessel was withdrawn from the Bass Strait service, the likely result would be an increase in freight charges because of a reduced level of competition.

</sample>

<sample><id> H06 </id>

<note> 2017 words </note>

<source> Gone with the winds: inquiry into meteorological services report from the
House of Representatives standing committee on expenditure  </source>

<h> CHAPTER TWO </h>
<h> BACKGROUND </h>

2.1       It is necessary both to understand the respective
roles played by the Department of Aviation (DofA) and the
Bureau of Meteorology (BofM) in the provision of meteorological
services to the aviation industry and to obtain an historical
perspective on developments leading to the need for this
inquiry.

<h> Department of Aviation and the Bureau of Meteorology Working
Arrangements </h>

2.2       The Secretary to the DofA has the legal
responsibility under the Air Navigation Regulations Section 98
(1), to determine the meteorological services which are
necessary `to ensure the safe, economic and regular operation
of aircraft' in Australia.

2.3       The Meteorology Act 1955 paragraph 6(2)(b), states
that `The Bureau shall perform its functions under the Act in
the public interest generally and in particular - for the
purposes... of civil aviation'. In addition, paragraph 8 of
the Act provides that `the Director of the Bureau may, subject
to any directions of the Minister, make charges for forecasts,
information, advice ... supplied in pursuance of the Act.'

2.4       In practice the DofA specifies the requirements for
meteorological services and the BofM provides the major part
of these services and subsequently charges the Department.
`These costs are, in turn, incorporated by the Department in
air navigation charges which are levied on the aviation
industry'. Meteorological charges are formalised in an
agreement between the Bureau and the Department entitled
`Working Arrangements for the Provision of Meteorological
Services and Facilities for Civil Aviation'.

2.5       The Bureau has been providing meteorological services
for civil aviation for the past 40 years. During this period
both the funding arrangements and the charging philosophy have
been altered.   In the years 1952 to 1979 the Department of
Aviation (or its predecessors - the Department of Transport and
the Department of Civil Aviation) contributed fixed percentages
of total Bureau expenditure on both salaries and also general
expenses.

2.6       The 1976 Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the
Bureau of Meteorology, the Howson Report, recommended that:

	`The provision of any additional service e.g. to civil aviation
	and the armed forces, should be subject to a charge aimed at
	recovering the marginal cost of providing the extra service and
	associated overheads....'.

2.7       Section 7 of the 1979 Working Arrangements sets out the
agreed charging principles and a charging formula. The charging
principles are summarised in Appendix VI. It should be noted
that whilst the Howson Report refers to marginal costs the
Working Arrangements use the slightly different terminology,
directly attributable costs `...officers directly involved in
the provision of the service'.

<h> Cost Recovery in the Department of Aviation </h>

2.8       Successive Australian Governments have endeavoured
to recover from the aviation industry the cost of the services
provided directly in support of civil aviation. The amounts
involved are considerable, for example, of the Department of
Aviation's budget for 1984-85, $471.5M was assessed as being
attributable (recoverable) costs. Revenue for the same period
was $282.9M comprising air navigation charges of $134.7M,
aviation fuel tax of $81.4M, and rents, concessions etc. of
$66.8M.

2.9       Overall this represents a cost recovery rate of some 
60 per cent. The balance of $188.6M was paid from consolidated
revenue.

In an attempt to increase departmental efficiency, the
Secretary to the Department of Aviation, in November 1983,
announced a target of an average 2 per cent per annum reduction
in real costs for the three years commencing July 1984.

<h> The Bosch Report and Meteorological Services </h>

2.10      The Bosch Committee was appointed by the Minister for
Aviation early in 1984 to inquire into all matters relating to
aviation cost recovery. It reported to the Minister in November
1984. Among the Inquiry's recommendations dealing with
opportunities for reducing costs was Recommendation (R59) which
states:

	`The Department should include (in its planning) as a specific
	objective the increase of at least 9 per cent in productivity
	over a ten year period. This would be in addition to the 2 per
	cent per annum reduction in real attributable costs over three
	years to which the Department is already committed'.

2.11      On 14 August 1985, following wide consultation, the
Minister for Aviation, the Hon Peter Morris, M.P., announced
that the Government had agreed to the adoption of the Bosch
Strategy.

2.12      The Bosch Report made six recommendations concerning
meteorological services as follows:

   &bullet;    Meteorological costs should continue to be attributed to the
	industry.(R19)

   &bullet;    Formal consultative arrangements should be established between
	the Department of Aviation, operators and the Bureau of
	Meteorology to ensure that the meteorology services supplied
	to the industry are provided at the required standard, that
	costs are kept within reasonable bounds, and that the
	development of the Bureau's investment program takes into
	account the concerns of the aviation industry.(R20)

   &bullet;    The basis for charges levied against the aviation industry for
	meteorological services should continue to be the incremental
	cost associated with providing the services.(R21)

   &bullet;    The Bureau of Meteorology should complete as soon as possible
	the study into development of a comprehensive costing system
	which would enable the identification of incremental
	costs.(R22)

   &bullet;    The Bureau of Meteorology should identify each of the services
	provided and the fees charged for them in its accounts to the
	Department of Aviation.(R23)

   &bullet;    The Bureau of Meteorology should negotiate with operators
	supplying meteorological data to agree on the costs involved
	and whether they warrant development of a system for paying for
	the data.(R24)

2.13      In addition the Report also briefly addressed the
current provisions for charging for meteorological services and
stated:

	`The intention of the charging principles is to charge the
	increment cost of providing aviation meteorological services.
	Not all the principles are strictly in accord with this
	intent'.

<h> Cost Reductions - the Basis of the Decision to Close Weather
Service Offices </h>

2.14      As noted above the Secretary to the Department of
Aviation had taken the initiative to anticipate the Bosch
findings through measures designed to improve the cost
effectiveness of his Department. This decision has been
subsumed by the subsequent decision of the Government to accept
the Bosch Report strategy and to proceed with its
implementation.

2.15 As part of the Department's effort to implement the
Secretary's decision, DofA decided to extend the containment
of costs to include the provision of meteorological services
to aviation.

2.16      Because of the nature of the Working Arrangements,
it proved difficult for the Bureau to determine how a general
`across the board' expenditure cut could be implemented.
Following protracted DofA and Bureau discussions, the Bureau
issued a Staff Notice on the 23 July 1985 foreshadowing the
possible closure of ten (originally nine) Weather Service
Offices (WSOs) over a three year period.

2.17      The proposed closures resulted in public protest from
a range of community interests including the general public,
farmers, fishermen, industry, port authorities and the media
as well as the aviation industry and in particular, general
aviation. Most of the communities affected were remote from the
major capital cities.

2.18      It is important to note that the existing Working
Arrangements provide under Principle 3 for the

	`Cost of shared services or facilities to be allocated 
	on a proportional basis, taking account of the relative 
	usage of the services or facilities.'

Under these arrangements therefore, it is little wonder that
the Department of Aviation is seeking a review of the charges.
There is ample evidence to support the claim that there is a
significant component of non-aviation weather services provided
by the provincial WSOs which are currently totally billed to
the Department of Aviation.

2.19      The Bureau has stated that the DofA did not formally
advise the Bureau that it did not wish to meet the full costs
of aviation meteorological services in 1984/85 until January
1985. Accordingly a shortfall of approximately $1M in the
Bureau's 1985/86 estimated revenue from charges for aviation
services exists.

2.20      The Bureau issued a Staff Notice concerning the
proposed WSO closures on 23 July 1985. Since this Staff Notice
a number of DofA and Bureau meetings have been held, some of
which have included staff associations and aviation industry
representatives. As the proposed closures had a significant
impact on the provision of non-aviation services, on 28
November 1985, the Ministers for Science and Aviation jointly
referred the issue to this Committee.

<h> CHAPTER 3 </h>
<h> EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSALS </h>

<h> The Direct Effect on Weather Service Offices </h>

3.1       The Bureau currently operates 28 Weather Service
Offices Australia wide. The direct effect of the proposals is
the closure of ten of these Offices. Details of current status
and proposed changes are included in Tables 3.1 and 3.2.
Timetables for the implementation of the closures are presented
in Appendix VIII.

3.2       The locations are Alice Springs, Cairns, Canberra,
Hobart, Launceston, Mt Isa, Port Hedland, Rockhampton, Tamworth
and also Essendon where services are provided from the
Melbourne Airport WSO on a shift rotation basis.

3.3       Weather Service Offices form part of the three-tiered
operational organisation of the Bureau. The three tiers
comprise:

   &bullet;    the National Meteorological Centre (NMC) in Melbourne and the
	Regional Meteorological Centre (RMC) in Darwin providing
	broadscale forecast and guidance material for the whole
	Australian area of responsibility:

   &bullet;    the eight Regional Forecasting Centres (RFCs), one of which is
	located in each State or Territory Regional Office with
	responsibility for weather services in their individual areas
	of responsibility. In addition Townsville is an RFC for
	aviation purposes. The RFCs act as warning centres with
	official Tropical Cyclone Warning Centres being located in
	Perth, Brisbane and Darwin. In addition they are `parent
	offices' for the WSOs and Observing Offices in their regions;
	and

   &bullet;    Field Offices including 28 major Weather Service Offices and
	50 official Observing Offices. The WSOs are located at Civil
	(17), Defence (8) and Joint User (3) airports.

3.4      The Observing Offices form part of the Bureau's basic
surface and upper air observing network. As part of their
duties, most provide routine (hourly) and special (half-hourly)
Aerodrome Weather Reports (AWRs), or observations, specifically
for aviation and many are collocated*colocated with WSOs. The
offices are staffed by Bureau trained observers who are
represented by the Professional Radio and Electronics Institute
of Australasia (PREIA).

3.5       The Weather Service Offices are staffed by Technical
Officers (Meteorology), in general recruited from the observer
ranks, who are members of the Association of Draughting,
Supervisory and Technical Employees (ADSTE).

3.6       The Bureau of Meteorology states that the WSOs were
originally established to provide services for aviation. Their
functions, as defined by the Bureau, can be formally summarised
as follows:

   &bullet;    maintaining meteorological watch for the locality of the office
	and providing input and feedback to RFC terminal forecasts and
	amendments for the local airport;

   &bullet;    preparing trend type forecasts for the local airport (where
	applicable);

   &bullet;    deriving forecasts for particular air routes from area
	forecasts received from the National Meteorological Centre or
	a parent RFC;

   &bullet;    compiling and presenting flight documentation to aircrew;

   &bullet;    distribution and interpretation of relevant public weather
	forecasts and warnings originated by the parent RFC; and

   &bullet;    acting as a point of liaison for local organisations.

3.7      From the DofA viewpoint, the major function of the WSOs
as defined in the Working Arrangements, is the provision of
face to face and/or telephone briefing to aircrew and
Departmental operations personnel to enable clarification and
elaboration of forecasts, warnings and the current
meteorological situation. Other functions include the
distribution of flight documentation, the provision of trend
type forecasts and a terminal area thunderstorm service where
appropriate. In addition there is a stated requirement for the
provision of Aerodrome Weather Reports.

3.8       It is obvious that one of the underlying reasons for
this inquiry has been the different interpretation of the
functions of the ten WSOs concerned. On the one hand the
Department has seen the offices as primarily providing a
briefing service; the Bureau on the other hand has, in
practice, implemented a far broader definition extending to the
distribution and interpretation of public weather forecasts and
a much wider weather watch function.

3.9       In the course of this inquiry the Committee visited
all ten WSOs proposed for closure.  At three locations - Hobart, Canberra Civil and Essendon the volume of public weather services provided was obviously low and the functions were primarily for aviation. 

</sample>



<sample><id> H07  </id>

<note> 2014 WORDS </note>

<source> Commonwealth Department of Health - Australia's response to Aids </source>

<bl> By Margaret Duckett </bl>

<h> NEW SOUTH WALES </h>

<h> A. INTRODUCTION </h>

   New South Wales has been the epicentre of the AIDS epidemic in
Australia, with 70% of the cases and an incidence of
infectivity of 33.1 per million of population.

   The Albion Street Centre was established in early 1985 and
remains the only clinic in Australia directed exclusively to
AIDS. Other services have been expanded to meet the need,
however the situation is still critical.

   A number of innovative and effective education programs have
been developed to address the issues posed by AIDS.

<h> B. CO-ORDINATION AND ADVICE </h>

   The New South Wales Department of Health has established three committees
to provide advice on matters related to AIDS.

   i) The AIDS Medical and Scientific Committee provides advice on matters 
relevant to the identification, diagnosis and treatment of persons infected 
by the AIDS virus. This Committee has a membership providing expertise in
areas including public health, immunology, venereology, virology, oncology 
and haematology.

   ii) The AIDS Education Committee focusses on the establishment of
appropriate educational strategies. Committee members provide expertise
in health education and public health. 

   iii) The AIDS Liaison Committee provides a mechanism for
consultation with community groups. This Committee includes
representatives of the Albion Street Centre, the Health Media
and Education Centre, the Australian Prostitutes Collective, the
AIDS Council of NSW, the AIDS Drug Information Collective, the
NSW Venereology Society and the NSW Nurses Association.

   Two working parties and two interdepartmental committees
have also been formed to provide co-ordination and advice. A
working party assessing educational material on intravenous
drug use and AIDS has been created and issues relating to
hospice care are being explored by a second working party.

   An interdepartmental committee on housing for clients
infected with the AIDS virus has been established. Members
include representatives of the Departments of Health, Youth and
Community Services, Housing and the Bobby Goldsmith Foundation.
The Committee has developed policies and procedures in relation
to the availability and use of special housing. A second
interdepartmental committee provides advice on issues related
to school children infected with the AIDS virus. Members
include representatives of the Departments of Health, Youth and
Community Services, and Education.

<h> C. FUNDING </h>

   Since 1984, New South Wales has received an allocation for
AIDS related areas from both State and Federal Governments of
$11,331,000. This level of funding has enabled the
establishment and development of a number of programs including
educational strategies, laboratory diagnostic services,
outpatient services, blood bank screening, counselling and
nursing.

  <h> i) Education </h>
<h> a) General </h>
The NSW Department of Health has developed a number of
educational programs in regard to AIDS.

   Intensive courses of seven days duration have been conducted
for health, welfare and education personnel responsible for the
provision of education regarding AIDS. The courses have been
designed to provide accurate, authoritative and useful
information about AIDS, to explore issues associated with AIDS,
and to stimulate the further development of educational
activities.

   Seminars and workshops have also been designed to meet
particular needs of various professional groups including
health care workers, health educators, drug and alcohol agency
staff, counsellors, and youth services personnel.

   A video and associated discussion booklet has been developed
to assist with providing the general community with accurate
information on AIDS and its implications.

   A statewide information line has been established to provide
information on AIDS, its symptoms and transmission, and on
referral agencies for further information. The usage of this
service currently stands at 5,700 calls per month.

   <h> b) Youth </h>
The NSW Health Department has initiated an Adolescents and
AIDS Project. This special project has surveyed youth services
in NSW to assess requirements in relation to education and
resources. Training and information seminars have been provided
for youth and welfare workers from a range of services, and
extensive literature distribution has been arranged. A resource
manual for use by youth workers and educators of adolescents
has been developed.

   A special health education project directed to youth and
presented in comic form has been prepared by Streetwize Comics.
The comics have been well received by young people and will be
utilised in a series of seminars directed to youth workers.

   A special outreach program for young people is conducted by
the Albion Street Centre. A nurse and a counsellor in a mobile
screening unit visit particular areas in the inner city to
provide education, support, counselling and an AIDS virus
antibody screening service.

   <h> c) Multicultural </h>
Ethnic media outlets have been utilised in an information
campaign about AIDS and STDs for people of non-English speaking
backgrounds. In addition, seminars for ethnic health care
workers have been provided. A pamphlet on AIDS has been
translated into nine community languages and full page
information advertisements have been placed in 17 community
language newspapers. Key community organisations, migrant
health staff and medical practitioners have also received
relevant information. The campaign has been promoted on SBS
Television and ethnic community radio. Ethnic Line, a telephone
referral service for people of non-English speaking background,
has reported that there has been a strong community response
to the campaign.

   <h> d) Prostitutes </h>
The Australian Prostitutes Collective has received funding from
the NSW and Federal Departments of Health to provide
preventative education regarding AIDS and other STDs. Three
field officers conduct outreach visits, present fortnightly
information seminars and prepare educational material
specifically directed to the target groups. A counselling
service is also provided.

   The STD Clinics and a new special clinic in Kings Cross
provide a health service including education on AIDS. It would
appear that most brothels and agencies have installed condom
vending machines and a majority of prostitutes require condom
use by their clients.

   <h> e) Intravenous drug users </h>
Strategies in relation to intravenous drug users have
focussed on providing education and support for AIDS
infected clients through existing drug treatment services.

   The majority of staff in government and non government
agencies have attended educational seminars and workshops to
ensure that they have the necessary information and skills to
educate and counsel clients about AIDS issues. Direct education
to intravenous drug users has also been provided through
outreach programs and contact tracing. The AIDS Drug
Information Collective has been particularly involved in the
development and promotion of these outreach programmes. A
specialised poster and pamphlet directed towards intravenous
drug users has been developed and distributed to appropriate
venues. Issues related to the availability of needles and
syringes are under consideration.

   <h> f) Regional activities </h>
The Department of Health has conducted intensive courses in
the larger regional centres for health, welfare and education
personnel. Seminars and meetings with members of the general
community and particular professional groups such as
pharmacists have also been facilitated.

   <h> ii) Counselling </h>
A range of counselling services is provided by a number of
centres. Clients have access to personal counselling by medical
practitioners, experienced social workers, psychologists or
trained volunteers as appropriate. Support groups for a range
of AIDS affected people have been established to provide both
information and therapy. Material is made available on the AIDS
virus, health strategies, ways to reduce stress, and other
relevant information.

   <h> iii) Services </h>
A State Reference Laboratory has been established at St
Vincents Hospital to undertake confirmatory tests on any
seropositive cases. The ICPMR unit at Westmead Hospital is
designated as the State Reference Laboratory for AIDS virology.

   Specialist outpatient services have been established at the
Albion Street Centre, the STD Clinics, and the major teaching
hospitals. These services have specialised staff and facilities
to provide reliable and complete medical information in
addition to pastoral, psychiatric and social counselling. The
Albion Street Centre in particular provides intensive medical
management and support services.

   A number of special units are available for patients
requiring hospitalisation. St Vincents Hospital has six beds
available, Prince of Wales/Prince Henry fourteen beds,
Newcastle four beds, and Prince Alfred four beds. In addition,
most of the teaching hospitals have also accommodated patients
infected with the AIDS virus. Five hospice beds are also
available.

   Most agencies providing services to intravenous drug users
have developed policies and procedures in regard to AIDS.
Clients who are AIDS virus antibody positive have priority in
access to the methadone program.

<h> D. LEGAL ISSUES </h>

There are a number of legislative enactments which make
specific provisions or have relevance in regard to AIDS.

   <h> i) Notification </h>
The Venereal Diseases Act was amended in August 1984 to provide
that Category A and B AIDS were notifiable on a compulsory basis.

   The Public Health Act 1902 was amended in November 1985 and
Regulations under this Act gazetted on 14 April 1986 to deem
AIDS (Category A, B or C) as a proclaimed disease under the
Act; require medical practitioners*practioners to notify the
Secretary of the NSW Department of Health of cases (by code),
penalty $1000, and create an offence if a person who knows
he/she has a proclaimed disease has sexual intercourse with
another person without the prior informed consent of the other
person, penalty $5,000.

   Records of the Commonwealth Department of Health would
indicate that this provision and the provision subsequently
enacted in Queensland appear to be the only legislation
worldwide which seeks to regulate the sexual conduct of people
with AIDS or related conditions.

   The Act also includes clauses providing penalties for
unnecessary disclosure of the identity of persons having
proclaimed diseases, penalty $2000.

   The legislation also regulates the activities of medical
practitioners and laboratories in regard to notification of the
disease, maintenance of records, confidentiality and provision
of information to patients.

   <h> ii) Donation of blood and tissue </h>
The enactment of the Human Tissue (Amendment) Act in May
1985 provided that blood and semen may not be received for
transfusion or artificial insemination unless a prescribed
certificate is signed relating to the medical suitability of
the donor. The certificate is not required if the specimen is
to be used for research purposes only or for sole treatment of
the donor. A person who knowingly signs a false or misleading
statement may be liable for a penalty of $5000 or imprisonment
for one year, or both.

   <h> iii) Legislation </h>
a) The Public Health (Skin Penetration) Regulation 1985
regulates activities which involve penetration of the skin or
tissue, including acupuncture, chiropody, podiatry, tattooing.

   b) The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1983, regulates
health and safety in the workplace. A number of organisations
have adopted occupational health and safety policies and
procedures which have positive implications in regard to AIDS,
in recognition of their responsibilities under the Act.

   c) The Anti-Discrimination Act 1977 makes it unlawful to
discriminate on the grounds of sex, race, marital status,
homosexuality, and physical or intellectual disability in the
areas of employment, state education, obtaining goods and
services, accommodation, registered clubs and trade unions.

   The Anti-Discrimination Board investigates and attempts to
conciliate complaints of discrimination in areas covered by the
Act. If conciliation can not be achieved, complaints may be
referred to the Equal Opportunity Tribunal for judicial
determination. To date, the Board has received approximately
15 complaints which were directly AIDS related, in addition to
those other complaints on grounds such as homosexuality which
may have had some AIDS related causes.

<h> E. DEPARTMENTAL RESPONSES </h>

   <h> i) Department of Health </h>
The Department of Health has established an AIDS/STD policy
unit with a full-time staff of four, and an AIDS education unit
with a full-time staff of five.

   The policy unit has responsibility for evaluating all
government and community AIDS projects and assessing the
funding necessary for these initiatives. In addition, officers
undertake liaison with a range of agencies.

   The activities of the education unit have been directed
towards health care personnel, members of high risk groups,
youth workers, personnel responsible for the provision of
education, and to the general community. Resource material has
been developed and extensive literature distribution arranged.

   <h> ii) Department of Corrective Services </h>
The Department of Corrective Services has adopted a number
of policies and procedures in response to the issues posed by
AIDS.

   In January 1985 an AIDS Advisory Committee was formed with
representation from relevent departmental divisions, the Prison
Medical Service, the then Health Commission and the Public
Service Association. AIDS groups were established during late
1985 in most corrective service institutions throughout the
state to facilitate education for prisoners and staff. 

</sample>



<sample><id> H08 </id>

<note> 2020 words </note>

<source> Human embryo experimentation in Australia: Senate Select Committee
on the Human Embryo Experimentation Bill 1985 </source>

<h> CHAPTER FOUR </h>
<h> A NATIONAL APPROACH </h>

4.1      The Committee next considers how the major
recommendation it makes might best be assured practical
application within the Australian community and especially how
it might effectively require the adherence of those undertaking
biomedical research. It is necessary to describe briefly the
current manner in which any guidelines in this area are
promulgated and applied.

4.2      At the national level, a government approved, non-
statutory regulatory code, issued by the NH&amp;MRC, is
administered by its Medical Research Ethics Committee (MREC)
which was formally established in 1982. The guidelines are
contained in the `NH&amp;MRC Statement on Human Experimentation and
Supplementary Notes' 1985.

4.3      These guidelines, which have been formally approved
by the Minister for Health, state that all medical research
should be approved by an IEC constituted and functioning
according to the NH&amp;MRC revised Supplementary Note 1. However,
the NH&amp;MRC cannot insist that institutions undertaking medical
research have an IEC, except where it funds that research.
Further, non-compliance with guidelines can only be penalised
by withdrawal of funding. Equally it does not have the power
to oversee IEC's without State acquiescence because
jurisdiction over medical practice and research is a State
matter.

4.4      Thus in Australia a voluntary system of regulation of
medical research operates with some national oversight. In
practice it would seem that ethics committees have been set up
in most institutions to consider research and to approve or
refuse research protocols submitted to them. It would also seem
that the NH&amp;MRC guidelines in this area are adhered to.

4.5      However, it must be noted that these guidelines give
very considerable scope to IECs to determine which
preimplantation-stage embryos might be subject to either basic
category of experimentation. Thus one IEC may consider
unethical the creation of embryos simply for the purpose of
non-therapeutic experimentation whilst deeming ethical such
experimental use of surplus embryos. Another IEC may permit
both, another may sanction neither. Again, the type of
experimentation to be undertaken is entirely left in the hands
of an IEC.

4.6      In recent years the MREC, with approval and funding
from the NH&amp;MRC, has conducted audits of IVF clinics in
Australia. These audits have been carried out on the basis of
voluntary acceptance by each institution of an invitation by
the MREC to participate in its review. Twelve centres had been
visited as of 31 December 1985 and, in the words of the MREC,
the response had been `uniformly cooperative'. In conducting
these audits the MREC has examined such matters as the presence
and constitution of IECs, the review of protocols by IECs, the
type of projects undertaken involving human embryos, and the
maintenance of registers of statistics on IVF procedures and
the fate of embryos created through IVF.

4.7      Much of the general adherence to the NH&amp;MRC guidelines
is due to to the work of the Fertility Society of
Australia, a society of medical practitioners in the area of
IVF, which has produced a set of standards for self-regulation
of IVF practice (`Programme Standards for Infertility Units
using In Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) and Related Technologies
Involving Egg and Embryo Collection and Transfer including
Gamete Intra Fallopian Transfer (GIFT).') Standard 16 of the
guidelines reads:

         Any experimentation involving fertilization or embryos
         must be signed by the governing or associated       
         institution Ethics Committee and confined to ethical 
         guidelines established by the NH&amp;MRC and appropriate 
         State Government.

Units which agree to abide by these standards are accredited
by the Society.

4.8      The Victorian Government has legislated to regulate
procedures associated with reproductive technology with the
Infertility (Medical Procedures) Act 1984. The majority of the
Act has yet to be proclaimed but it specifically prohibits a
number of experiments involving embryos while vesting
considerable power in a Standing Review and Advisory Committee.
Under s. 6(3) a person is prohibited from carrying out an
`experimental procedure' unless it has been approved by the
Committee. An `experimental procedure' is defined in s. 6(4)
as:

         ... a procedure that involves carrying out research
         on an embryo of a kind that would cause damage to the 
         embryo, would make the embryo unfit for implantation
         or would reduce the prospects of a pregnancy resulting
         from the implantation of the embryo.

4.9      In addition, cloning and fertilising human gametes
with non-human gametes are `prohibited procedures' under s.
6(1) of the Act and these latter prohibitions may not be
overridden. Although the Act has yet to be substantially
proclaimed, clinicians and research scientists in Victoria have
undertaken to abide by its general principles.

4.10     Several witnesses strongly supported the system of
IECs. Thus, Dr James Cummins, Secretary of the Australian
Society for Reproductive Biology, stated: `... I would prefer
to see a system of institutional ethics committees deciding
these matters at the coal-face, so to speak'. The relative
autonomy of IECs with their voluntary adherence to the NH&amp;MRC
guidelines, allowing a very varied range of experimental
procedures to be permitted in various institutions, was claimed
by some witnesses to be a good thing in that it allowed local
community mores, or ethical stances peculiar to that
institution, to be observed. Of course, put another way, this
also allows for bias in the selection by the institution of
members of IECs so as to ensure a particular approach is
adopted. It may be desirable for a member (nominated by either
State or*of Federal government) to be appointed to each IEC.

4.11     As pointed out in the Asche Committee Report:

         This "honour system" of regulating research into    
         reproductive technology has worried people like     
         Professor Louis Waller, chairman of the Victorian   
         Committee, who in 1984 expressed his concern that: "an 
         honour system can work only where people are        
         honourable. Is honour enough? My feeling is that it 
         is not." (Melbourne "Age", 28.6.84). Professor Waller 
         also indicated his belief that medical research should 
         be controlled by legislation.

4.12     The question of honour is specifically relevant to
the commercialisation of IVF techniques. The commercialisation
of research and consequent provision of funding independent of
the NH&amp;MRC can lead to a situation where there is no pressure
to require adherence to such guidelines as may exist. In this
situation, for such guidelines to have force, some legally
enforceable adherence to them must be achieved.

4.13     Evidence was put to the Committee favouring a
consistent nationwide approach. As stated by Dr John Kerin, who
was then Head of the Reproductive Medicine Unit of the Queen
Elizabeth Hospital in Adelaide:

         Right from the beginning our group and many other   
         groups in Australia would have preferred that a     
         national body were set up to look at terms of       
         reference, with recommendations preferably on       
         legislation as to what IVF programs should be doing. 
         I think this was echoed by Justice Kirby to me and to 
         other people publicly some four years ago - that it   
         would be better to have a national expert body looking 
         at these new advances rather than a State to State  
         situation because what we are getting now, unless I 
         am wrong, is that we will have different rules, say, 
         in Victoria, and different rules in South Australia; 
         that makes a mockery of the situation and we lose   
         credibility. There is confusion amongst the infertile 
         couples. They go to one State for one form of       
         treatment and they come here for another. It causes 
         a lot of confusion and a loss of credibility and I  
         would firmly support a national expert approach rather 
         than a State to State approach.

4.14     Professor Roger Short, representing the Academy of
Science in evidence before the Committee stated:

         The Academy's view would be to plead with this      
         Committee to set up Federal as opposed to State     
         legislation. It is really going to make chaos if we 
         have differing State legislation within differing   
         States and it would just make a nonsense of the law. 
         This is a very good instance of an occasion when one 
         needs some strong, central, Federal guidance on this 
         issue, because it is of great concern to a large    
         number of people.

4.15     Backing for a nation-wide approach may be given by the
Parliaments at the national and/or State levels. Thus Professor
Richard Lovell, chairman of the MREC stated in evidence:

         We believe there ought to be a national overview. We
         believe that so far we have given the national      
         overview of the ethical headlines, and we believe that 
         where muscle is needed the State governments ought to 
         be asked to acknowledge these national guidelines, or 
         the whole of supplementary note 4, in other words. We
         believe that State governments should be prompted to
         identify, if they have not already done so, every   
         institution in which IVF is developed and to make it 
         perhaps a condition of an institution's registration 
         that it comply with national guidelines.

Mr Ian Johnston, chairman of the Reproductive Biology Unit of
Royal Women's Hospital in Melbourne, expressed the opinion that
some sort of State licensing system incorporating the NH&amp;MRC
guidelines would be appropriate.

4.16     Dr Aileen Connon, who co-chaired the South Australian
Working Party on In Vitro Fertilisation and Artificial
Insemination by Donor, stated in evidence to the Committee:

         I believe that, in terms of controls, guidelines for
         research in IVF such as the NHMRC ones, have served
         a useful purpose, but they are no longer sufficient.
         I believe that licensing of programs is essential. I
         do not think hospital ethics committees are effective
         in controlling potential program development in the
         future. I believe that, as Warnock has said, breaches
         of licensing regulations - if they ever come in -   
         should be indictable offences. I think independent  
         regulatory or monitoring committees should exist in 
         each State.

4.17     The Committee does not consider that the present
system of IECs, giving voluntary adherence to nationally
promulgated guidelines, is adequate. It is highly desirable
that the whole Australian community observe uniform ethical
standards in a matter as crucial as human embryo
experimentation. The Asche Committee Report emphasises `...
that the social, moral, legal and ethical questions involved
in the area of reproductive technology are not confined within
State boundaries. They are national issues which should be
addressed at a national level.'

4.18 This can be achieved by a co-operative approach between
the Federal and State legislatures and governments. The
Committee is aware of the very short, direct reach of
Commonwealth Constitutional power in this area. In fact, the
Victorian State Government in a written submission stated:

         ... Victoria feels considerable concern that the Bill
         attempts the exercise by the Commonwealth of a power
         where the States have power to legislate, that of the
         regulation of medical practice and research. Lacking
         direct power to regulate these matters, the         
         Commonwealth has to have recourse to indirect means 
         of control which only partially cover the area. This 
         is of concern given that the State has already      
         legislated comprehensively. The inevitably patchy  
         coverage of the area by the proposed Commonwealth   
         legislation adds to, rather than resolves, the      
         problems raised by IVF and associated matters.

4.19     The Committee is concerned to ensure that the fullest
discussion with the States on its recommendations takes place
and indeed it regards its receipt of the submission from the
Victorian Government as indicating that dialogue is regarded
as essential.

4.20     The Australian Federal system has displayed great
ingenuity in successfully managing to achieve desired results
despite the apparent constitutional difficulties created by the
distribution of legislative powers.

4.21     In addition to simply uniform legislation whereby each
unit in the Federation passes a law achieving the same legal result, 
but confined to matters falling within its constitutional competence, 
other devices have been used. Thus State criminal and civil law can 
apply in `a Commonwealth place' within a State. Again, companies and 
securities legislation passed by the Commonwealth Parliament, after 
approval by the Ministerial Council, comprising Federal and 
State Attorneys-General*Atorneys-General, automatically applies 
to entities and transactions subject only to State law. The Committee 
is confident that a system can be devised which allows the one set
of ethical principles to apply by force of law to biomedical
experimentation in Australia.

4.22 The Committee favours a national system of accreditation of those institutions within which experimentation on human embryos might take place.

</sample>




<sample><id> H09 </id>

<note> 2000 words </note>

<source> Indigenous resource rights and mining companies in North America and Australia </source>

<bl> By Stuart McGill and G J Crough </bl>

<h> CHAPTER 4 THE NORTHERN AMERICAN LINKS OF THE AUSTRALIAN MINING
INDUSTRY COUNCIL MEMBERS </h>

<h> Choice of the North American Contrast </h>

The basic object of the research summarised in this Chapter is
to ascertain which of those corporate groups that are members
of the Australian Mining Industry Council (AMIC) have dealings
with indigenous people in both North America and Australia. The
comparison between indigenous people in North America and
Australia has been drawn because the historical and
contemporary situation of the indigenous minorities in North
America closely resembles that of Aboriginal Australians.

It should be noted however that there are many other locations
where transnational mining companies have extensive experience
in dealing with indigenous people, either as indigenous
minorities or as Third World governments. Some of these
locations, and the agreements, are mentioned in the corporate
profiles that follow, but they are not the main focus of this
Report.

In the past, mining companies in Australia have argued that the
Australian case is unique and that overseas precedents are not
relevant. The advantage of addressing only the North American
case is that it is far more difficult to distinguish
differences from the Australian situation. It is therefore more
difficult for mining companies to justify why their attitudes
and behaviour should be different on the other side of the
Pacific Ocean.

Such research raises several other issues. Obviously the most
important result flowing from such research is the
identification of those corporate groups which have experience
in dealing with indigenous minorities. However, it also raises
issues in relation to the motivations behind the behaviour of
various corporate groups and organisations in Australia in
recent years. These and other matters will be addressed in this
Chapter.

<h> Major Corporate Groups in AMIC </h>

In order to facilitate this study it is necessary to condense
the list of 135 organisations that are members of AMIC into a
list of major corporate groups. Two member organisations can
immediately be excluded: one is a professional organisation
(Association of Consulting Surveyors Inc) and one is a
partnership (W.T. Partnership).

A corporate group consists of a parent company, subsidiaries
and associated companies. For the purpose of this study,
subsidiaries are companies in which the parent company has a
controlling interest, while an associated company is one in
which the parent has an interest sufficient to exert a
significant degree of influence. The corporate group is
generally characterised by centralised and coordinated
management control over the operations of the various companies
within the group, particularly in relation to the financial and
investment decisions of the companies. As a result, the parent
company requires complete knowledge of the activities being
undertaken by its group members.

The companies within the group may operate in only one country,
or as is usually the case with large companies, in a number of
countries. Corporate groups with operations in a number of
countries are referred to as transnational or multinational
corporations.

By applying these criteria, the list of AMIC members can be
condensed into approximately 50 corporate groups. These groups
include as few as one or two AMIC companies, or as many as the
19 CRA Ltd companies that are members of AMIC. It should be
noted that such corporate groups also include many companies
that are not members of AMIC. For instance, such non-member
companies may be involved in non-mining activities, or in other
countries, or a corporate group may have simply decided that
it is unnecessary for some of the mining companies in the group
to be members of AMIC.

With regard to a corporate group's membership of AMIC, it is
relevant to note that only one member of a corporate group pays
membership dues. For example, although several companies of the
BHP group are members of AMIC, only The Broken Hill Proprietary
Company Ltd pays membership fees. Nevertheless the other
members of the BHP group listed as members of AMIC are treated
as full members of the Council. AMIC advises that this does not
create administrative problems, such as the issue of which
corporations are entitled to vote, because all decisions are
taken by consensus. In the meantime, it is clear that such
arrangements confer the advantage that the membership of AMIC
appears to be larger than the actual number of corporate groups
represented.

In other words, AMIC appears to represent approximately 133
companies, rather than the 50 corporate groups to which it can
be reduced. This reduction in size of AMIC's membership is
supported by the very manner in which AMIC collects its
membership dues. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this Report,
the number of corporate groups has been reduced further by the
inclusion of associated companies in the corporate groups. For
example, a study of the shareholders and directors of the
Newmont Mining Corporation in the United States shows that the
company is closely associated with the Anglo American
Corporation group of South Africa. The Australian subsidiary
Newmont Holdings Pty Ltd is here included as part of the Anglo
American group, whereas AMIC probably considers the company to
be an independent member.

<note> TABLE </note>

If the companies that are not significant, for the purpose of
this Report, are eliminated from the 50 corporate groups which
are members of AMIC, then the number of significant corporate
groups that comprise AMIC can be reduced to 23. These are
listed in Table 9. Corporate groups are considered to be not
significant for current purposes if no member or members of the
group are carrying out substantial mining or exploration
activities in Australia, or if so, those activities have no
known impact on Aboriginal land or interests. The groups in
this category are listed in Table 10. It should be noted that
the full list of AMIC members and their parent companies or
substantial shareholders is shown in Appendix 3 (as at August
1985).

There are some comments which arise from a consideration of the
companies listed in Table 10. All but two of the 26 groups
listed have only one subsidiary or associate as a member of
AMIC. Kalgoorlie Mining Associates has one other company in the
group which is also a member of AMIC, and Gencor (Australia)
Pty Ltd has two subsidiaries which are members. In addition,
it should also be noted that Queensland Alumina Ltd and Worsley
Alumina Pty Ltd are alumina refining companies which are owned
by consortia of major companies (some of which are members of
AMIC in their own right). As such they are hardly corporate
groups, and are listed here mainly for convenience.
Accordingly, whereas these 25 groups represent 28 members of
AMIC, the 23 corporate groups which are considered significant
for this study represent the remainder of the 133 companies
which are members of AMIC.

The validity of an approach which focusses on the major
corporate groups is supported by the various industry
concentration statistics published in recent years. For
example, of the 338 taxable companies in the mining industry
in 1982-83 the largest 36 accounted for over 96% of the taxable
income (Commissioner of Taxation 1985). Statistics published
by the Australian Bureau of Statistics show that the largest
4 enterprise groups accounted for 43% of total mining industry
value added in 1982-83. The largest 12 groups accounted for 65%
of industry value added, and the largest 20 for 77% (out of a
total of 914 enterprise groups). Quite clearly it is these
large companies which dominate the industry in terms of
production, investment, exports and revenue.

<note> TABLE </note>

A further feature of the membership of AMIC is the large number
of foreign controlled companies. As Appendix 3 shows, 55 of the
member companies can be classified as Australian controlled,
72 are foreign controlled, and 6 (the MIM group) are associated
companies of a US corporation. These figures are consistent
with the statistics published by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics on foreign ownership and control of the mining
industry.

The level of foreign ownership, measured in terms of value
added was 50.4% in 1982-83, while the level of foreign control
was 56.6%. Companies from the United States and United Kingdom
have been the most important foreign investors in the industry,
with US ownership of 24% and UK of 16% in 1982-83.

On the basis of controlling shareholdings, only 7 of the
significant corporate groups are Australian controlled: BHP,
CSR, North Broken Hill, Peko-Wallsend, Pancontinental Mining,
Pioneer Concrete Services, and Western Mining Corporation. As
noted previously, the MIM group is an associated company of the
US corporation Asarco Inc. It is interesting to note that the
AMIC Aboriginal Affairs Committee includes representatives of
all of these Australian controlled corporate groups with the
exception of Pancontinental Mining Ltd, as well as MIM, CRA
(two members), Shell Company, and the Chamber of Mines of
Western Australia. A full list of the members of the Committee
is included in Appendix 4.

<h> Corporate Groups With North American Experience in Dealing with
Indigenous People </h>

The thrust of this section of the Report is not directed at the
issue of foreign ownership and control. It arises only because
the foreign ownership issue overlaps with the question of the
extent of international dealings with indigenous people. This
is largely due to the fact that Australia has few of its own
transnational corporations. Although definitions of a
transnational corporation vary, BHP is probably the only major
Australian-owned company that is a member of AMIC that can be
classified as a transnational corporation with respect to the
mining industry. Such overseas interests that Australian
companies do have are summarised in Appendix 5.

The impact of this fact is that of the significant corporate
groups identified in AMIC, it is principally the foreign-
controlled transnational groups that have had experience on
indigenous land in North America. Table 11 lists the companies
that have, or have had, dealings with Aboriginals in Australia
and Indians in North America. It should be noted that a number
of these companies are members of the Non-Producers' Group of
AMIC, but have extensive exploration programmes throughout
Australia.

<note> TABLE </note>

Although the corporate profiles later in this section contain
greater details, there are a few comments about the above list
which it is appropriate to make at this stage. First, the
numbers in brackets in the left hand column are the number of
companies that are members of AMIC who are also in the same
corporate group. These companies form a total of 46 of the 133
companies that make up the membership of AMIC. More
importantly, these 12 groups are more than half of the
significant mining groups that are represented by AMIC, and
three of these groups are members of the AMIC committee on
Aboriginal land rights (BHP, MIM, Shell).

Second, except for BHP and MIM, all the groups of companies in
the list have obtained their experience of indigenous resource
rights by virtue of the fact that they are subsidiaries of
parent organizations which have operations in North America.
Within this category, Aberfoyle is a slightly different case
because it was an Australian company which was acquired by the
Canadian mining conglomerate Cominco Ltd. MIM is a separate
case because it is now an associated company of Asarco Inc as
each of the two companies have substantial holdings in each
other. To return to the point about Australian transnationals,
it is only BHP which has had dealings with indigenous people
in other countries by virtue of its acquisition of an overseas
subsidiary.

<h> Corporate Groups With No Apparent Experience in Dealing with
Indigenous People in North America </h>

By way of contrast, the other significant corporate groups in
AMIC consist of predominantly Australian-owned companies. The
feature which distinguishes these companies is their apparent
lack of experience of dealing with indigenous people in North
America. These companies are listed in Table 12.

<note> TABLE </note>

The salient features of Table 12 may be reviewed as follows.
First, these eleven corporate groups are made up of a total of
59 member companies of AMIC. However, if CRA is excluded from
this list, then only 40 member companies are represented. 
                                                          
</sample>



<sample><id> H10 </id>

<note> 2006 words </note>

<source> Departmental reviews in higher education institutions </source>

<bl> By Ernest Roe and Ingrid Moses </bl>

<h> III        THE REVIEW PROCESS </h>

<h> III.1      Introduction </h>

   One would expect departmental review procedures to exhibit similar features
in different institutions, in much the same way as do other evaluative
procedures such as promotion, granting of study leave and allocation of
research grants.  It is normal for academics to be judged by their peers,
for evidence to be submitted by those being evaluated, for referees and
assessors to be used, for the whole exercise to be conducted through and
validated by some kind of committee system (and perhaps passing through
more than one such committee before a final decision is made).

   Those initiating, conducting or being subjected to a departmental review
face similar sets of problems and challenges: similar, but, with due observance
of the proper tradition of institutional, departmental and individual autonomy
which pervades tertiary institutions, not identical.  It can easily be
demonstrated that most departmental reviews grapple with most if not all
of the following:  the reasons for the review, its terms of reference, the
composition of the review committee, the procedures for collection of evidence,
the timing of various procedures - committee meetings, submissions, interviews,
for example - and the total time span of the review, the provision of
administrative back-up, the writing and subsequent treatment of a report,
implementation of its recommendations, and other consequences of the review.
That is not intended as a comprehensive list of all that typically happens
in a review.  But the significant point is that, however alike the problems
and challenges which departmental reviews encounter, the solutions vary
to a considerable extent.

   Thus, while it is relatively simple, after scrutiny of a number of reviews,
to say "These are the usual stages of a review" or "These are the procedural
questions people generally have to answer", it is much more difficult to
generalise about the "correct" or "best" answers.  Sometimes we shall have
to report that "In institution A they chose this committee membership, adopted
this methodology, handled the report thus, whereas in Institution B they
made very different, even opposite decisions:  and, as far as we can tell,
the two reviews were equally efficient and effective."  Nevertheless, if
this Report is to be a useful document, some generalisation must be attempted,
lightly or heavily qualified, hedged around with contingencies, wherever
the facts and our judgment seem to justify that.  In defining, however
cautiously, what seems to us from the evidence to be good practice, we accept
that individuals - and individual institutions - have chosen to take a
different path and will do so in the future.

   Procedures adopted in institutions are influenced by explicit or implicit
expectations of what role departmental reviews play.  Purposes of reviews
are discussed in section 3.  Here the more general dimensions which have
become apparent are briefly mentioned.

   <h>(a)  formalised vs informal </h>
This could also be called objective versus consultative.  In some
        reviews formal channels of communication were observed, e.g.
        submissions were called, persons were invited for interviews and
        could speak to their submissions or make an oral statement. There
        were no other interactions between review committee and members
	of staff.  Contact with both the department and the institution's
	executive was restricted to official `business'.  In other reviews,
	however, members of the reviewed unit, notably the head, had continuous
	access to the review committee through consultation by phone or
	face-to-face, and were able to influence the outcome of the review
	considerably.

This leads directly to the next dimension.

   <h>(b)  inspectorial/evaluative vs developmental/educative </h>
On this dimension reviewers are either evaluators or facilitators
	of change.  Some reviews put the review committee into the position
	of independent judges, who, after having collected and assessed
	evidence, passed their judgment on the department.  In
	such reviews little regard may be given to what change is feasible
	and how change can be implemented. If the institution sees the
	reviewers' function, and if the reviewers themselves see their
	function, as more developmental and educative, then reviewers will
	want to interact freely with members of the department, with the
	institution's executive, feed their impressions and preliminary
	judgments to them and engage in a continuing dialogue.  In this
	case the review process itself is educative, and change may already
	occur during the review process.

   <h>(c)  utopian (free from resource constraints) vs realistic (resource </h>
	bound)
	If reviewers can assess a department and recommend for an ideal
	situation, fundamental aspects of the department, viewed over a
	longer time-span, can be addressed.  Realistic recommendations are
	normally expected when the review brief specifies that developments
	in the short run, e.g. in the next five years should be addressed,
	and that recommendations should have no resource implications (which
	in practice means should not require additional resources).

   <h>(d)  crisis review vs regular review </h>
	If prompted by a crisis or a specific occurrence like change of
	headship, retirement of a professor, sharp decline in student numbers,
	reviews may be initiated with the specific task of addressing this
	situation and making suggestions on how to deal with it.  Regular
	reviews on the other hand become a normal and planned feature of
	the institution, and may pick up developments already under way
	in the department. 

   <h>(e)  comparative within institution vs comparative across the discipline </h>
	The basis for comparison may be other schools or departments within
	the same institution, and may determine whether a department is
	seen as viable in size, productive, healthy and happy.  Institutional
	and public interests and how they can be reconciled may be addressed
	if comparisons are made Australia-wide across the discipline.

   <h>(f)  review of a group vs review of individuals </h>
	The reputation of departments is clearly dependent on individuals,
	their teaching and research programs and their performance in these.
	In some reviews individuals and their contributions (or lack of
	them) have to be addressed, through recommendations concerning new
	positions, redirection of efforts, private and confidential reports
	to the Chief Executive.  In others, individual performance per se
	is not investigated, or at least not reported on, and the focus
	remains firmly on the department.  Generally the issue of individual
	contribution to the department cannot be avoided, but a departmental
	review report is not seen as the appropriate place to go into detail.

   Among the reviews we scrutinised were two which had unique features,
briefly described in this section.

<h> III.1.1     A descriptive review </h>

   In 1980 the Director of the (then) North Brisbane CAE submitted a proposal
which was "to evaluate the effiency and effectiveness of the academic structure
and administrative practices of the Department of Liberal Studies as they
bear on the quality of its courses and its complex service role for other
Departments."

   It was to be conducted by a team from the Centre for the Advancement
of Learning and Teaching (CALT) at Griffith University which would "work
in consultation with the Head of the Department of Liberal Studies but ...
have professional responsibility for the planning, conduct and management
of the study."

   That quotation is taken from an Agreement drawn up between North Brisbane
CAE and CALT on the conduct of the review.  The Agreement begins with an
account of what the review "will attempt to describe", and Item 1 concludes
with this statement:

   "While issues of effectiveness and efficiency will arise during the course
   of the study, and directions for change may appear, it must be recognised
   that the study is limited.  Its purpose is to describe and analyse but
   not to prescribe."

Similarly, the Introduction to the Report begins with the statement, that
"The emphasis of the review was to be on description rather than judgment."

   Other Items in the Agreement state that documents will be analysed, 50-60
people will be interviewed, including all staff of the department, that
the College will ensure the project team's access to these people, that
the study will be completed within six months, and that "every effort will
be made not to report interviews in such a way as to identify individual
sources" but that "where an individual person is identified authorisation
will be sought".

   There are therefore two unusual features in the approach to this review:
the drawing up of a formal agreement between the head of the institution
in which a department was being reviewed and the external review team,
concerning the conduct of the review; and the emphasis on description and
analysis rather than judgment and prescription.

   The review report duly presents, in considerable detail, facts and figures
about the department.  "Description" permits inclusion of evaluative comments
from others, as long as they are straight quotations.  Similarly "analysis"
permits statements with a certain judgmental flavour.  Such statements are
usually prefaced by "it is said that ...", "it is felt that ...", "some
staff say ..." and similar phrases.

   Nevertheless the emphasis remains on description throughout this very
thorough account of the Department of Liberal Studies, an account with ten
appendices giving still more basic information.  Consistent with this approach,
the review team offers no recommendations.  The assumption - and the essence
of the Agreement between institution and review team - is clearly that,
presented with this full description, the College authorities or anyone
else intimately concerned will be able to make their own evaluations.

   Unfortunately it was impossible for us to follow up this particular review.
When the review began, amalgamation of the North Brisbane CAE with two other
CAEs to form the Brisbane CAE had already been proposed, and it happened
almost immediately afterwards.  The situation was therefore radically altered
and became a situation to which the review had lost most if not all of its
relevance.

   This does not of course mean that the methodology of the review is no
longer relevant.  Neither of the two features noted here - the drawing-up
of an agreement, and a review confining itself to description - has been
adopted in other departmental reviews as far as we know, and certainly not
in those we have been scrutinising.  But they merit the attention of those
involved in or planning to undertake reviews.

   The arguments for a formal agreement with an external review team are
similar to those for explicit and detailed terms of reference discussed in
section 4 below.  Both help to make intentions explicit, to clarify
expectations, and to repudiate mystery and secrecy.  Formal agreements may
also help to ensure that an institution gets its money's worth, though that
does not seem to have been a problem in any of our other reviews. 

   "Description" and "judgment" are more clearly contrasted in discussion
of theory or principle than they are in practice.  Review reports vary,
with some more descriptive, some more judgmental.  The example from North
Brisbane CAE is an extreme example of the `descriptive' mode, making particular
efforts to avoid judgments, and making no recommmendations.  Other reviews
are largely descriptive, with judgments mainly at the end, in the form of
recommendations; and those may be cautiously phrased.  Towards the other
extreme are review reports with comparatively little description (or
presentation of data) and evaluative comments on practically every page,
leading finally to quite dogmatic recommendations.

   It appears to be the normal expectations of those initiating departmental
reviews that a review committee will "evaluate" and will make firm
recommendations.  Even the North Brisbane CAE proposal describes its principle
objective as "to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness ..."  But this
example indicates that a review may concentrate on provision of a detailed
picture which others may then use as a basis for evaluation in the usual
judgmental sense.  The onus is on the institution, and on the department
itself, rather than on the external reviewers.

   We do not wish to recommend or to discourage descriptive reviews.  We
simply draw attention to this possibility which may, either as a matter
of principle or because of the peculiar circumstances of a review, be regarded
as the most desirable way to proceed.

<h> III.1.2     A developmental review </h>

   During 1983-84 CTEC supported an evaluation of "Surveying and Mapping
Education and Training in Queensland" through its Evaluations and
Investigations Program.  As the title clearly indicates, this was not a
departmental review.  Nevertheless it is methodologically of some interest.
 
</sample>



<sample><id> H11 </id>

<note> 2000 words </note>

<source> The depreciation of the Australian dollar: its impact on importers and
manufacturers  </source>

<h>4. Impact on manufacturers' input prices and costs </h>

<h>4.1 Introduction</h>

The depreciation of the Australian dollar is expected to
influence the manufacturing sector in a number of respects.
First, imported goods which are close substitutes for
domestically produced goods are a source of actual and
potential competition for local manufacturers. To the extent
that prices of competitive imports are raised by the
depreciation, this provides domestic producers of import-
competing goods with a relative price advantage. Secondly, many
manufacturers use imported inputs in their production
activities, either in the form of capital goods (machinery and
equipment) or intermediate goods (raw materials, semi-processed
materials, and components). In so far as the depreciation leads
to higher domestic currency prices of imported goods, the
production costs of local manufacturers are thereby raised
directly.

In this chapter, consideration is given to the magnitude of the
price increases charged by overseas suppliers of materials and
components to domestic manufacturers following the
depreciation, and the speed with which the price increases were
transmitted. In seeking to explain differences in these price
changes across industries, information is provided on the
countries from which the imports were sourced, the currencies
in which the contracts were denominated, and the order and
payment lags involved.

One benefit expected from a depreciation is that the resultant
change in relative prices should lead to a switch in demand
away from imported goods to relatively less expensive
domestically produced substitutes. Findings are presented on
how volumes of purchases of imported and domestically produced
materials and components by manufacturers changed following the
depreciation in 1985, and how they were expected to change
during the first half of 1986.

One factor which influences the extent to which manufacturers
switch their purchases is the degree of substitutability
between imported and domestically produced materials and
components. Accordingly, information is presented on the extent
to which such import substitution on the input side is feasible
for manufacturers, and some evidence provided of examples of
import substitution which have actually taken place as a result
of the depreciation.

Throughout the chapter, as well as attempting to gauge the
quantitative magnitude of the price changes and volume
responses, consideration is given to identifying the time lags
involved.


<h>4.2 Characteristics of the firms surveyed </h>

The 109 manufacturers who responded to the survey were
classified to industry groups on the basis of their predominant
activity. The number of firms in each industry group are given
in Table 4.1, and the distribution by employment size is shown
in Table 4.2.

As noted in Chapter 1, in selecting the sample of firms, more
emphasis was placed on those firms which use imports as inputs
in their production processes and/or whose output is
competitive with imports. While the coverage of firms across
industries may therefore not be fully representative of the
output structure of manufacturing, it is nevertheless thought
to be satisfactory for the purposes of this study. Further,
while a very small proportion of the respondent firms are
`small' (employing less than 100 persons), it is the reactions
of larger firms to the depreciation which have the greater
quantitative impact on output and employment changes, and for
this reason the study gives them greater coverage.

The effect of the depreciation on individual industries would
be expected to differ, depending on the extent to which they
are import-using and/or import-competing. Import usage will be
considered first.

The vast majority of the 109 manufacturing firms were engaged
in importing, either of materials and components for use in
production and/or final goods to complement their product
range. In 1985, some forty-seven of the 109 manufacturers were
directly involved in both types of importing activity, thirty-
five firms imported materials and components only, and seven
firms imported final goods but not materials or components.
Only twenty of the 109 manufacturers did not engage in any
direct importing activity.

In order to assess how important the use of imported inputs
(materials and components) is in manufacturing production,
information was sought on the cost structure of firms. The
relevant data are set out in Table 4.3.

For the ninety-two manufacturers imported inputs accounted, on
average, for around 21 per cent of production costs in 1985,
while domestically produced inputs accounted for around 36 per
cent. However, considerable differences are apparent across
industries in the relative share of costs accounted for by
these two categories of inputs. Imported materials and
components accounted, on average, for a relatively small share
of costs (less than 10 per cent) in Non-metallic mineral
products and Basic metal products, but represented one-quarter
or more of total production costs in five industries -
Textiles, Chemical products, Transport equipment, Appliances
and electrical equipment, and Industrial machinery and
equipment. Domestically produced materials and components were
used most intensively in Wood, wood products and furniture,
Paper and paper products, Basic metal products, and Fabricated
metal products.

<note> TABLE </note>

In order to provide additional information on the distribution
of the share of imported inputs in total production costs of
manufacturers, firms were assigned to the categories listed in
Table 4.4. For 19 per cent of firms imported inputs accounted
for less than 5 per cent of costs, whereas at the other extreme
they accounted for one-third or more of costs in approximately
25 per cent of firms.

In addition to undertaking the importation of materials and
components, many manufacturers also engage in importing final
goods. Information on the share of domestic sales in 1984-85
accounted for by domestically produced goods, and imported
final goods, was provided by all but two of the 109
manufacturers (Table 4.5). For the majority of firms, imports
of final goods represented only a very minor share (less than
5 per cent) of total sales. However, for about one-quarter of
the firms they accounted for 10 per cent or more of domestic
sales, and for two firms more than 50 per cent.

Turning now to the extent of import competition faced by local
manufacturers, two important determinants of the extent to
which an industry is import-competing are (l) the proportion
of imports which compete with domestic production, and (2) the
proportion of the domestic sales of the industry accounted for
by competitive imports. The latter variable (market penetration
by competitive imports) is conventionally used as an indicator
of the degree of actual import competition faced by domestic
sellers in an industry. However, firm behaviour is also
influenced by the threat of potential import competition.

Information on the relative importance of competitive and non-
competitive imports across industries, together with the market
penetration of competitive imports, is presented in Table 4.6. 
The definitions of competitive and non-competitive imports
are those used by the IAC. Non-competitive imports are defined
as those which attract minimum rates of duty (2.5 per cent or
less), including those which enter under by-law concessions.
It is reasonable to assume that higher tariff duties have not
been imposed on such goods because there is no domestic
production of close substitutes. Non-competitive imports mainly
comprise capital equipment, materials and components, and some
consumer durables. Competitive imports on the other hand are
those which enter at higher rates of duty (2.5 per cent or
more), and which tend to compete more closely with domestic
output.

At the broad industry group level, market penetration by
competitive imports is most important in Textiles, Clothing and
footwear, Transport equipment, Appliances and electrical
equipment, Industrial machinery and equipment, and Other
manufacturing. Of course, a more finely disaggregated industry
classification would reveal instances of significant import
competition within some of the other broad industry groupings.

<h>4.3 Prices of imported materials and components </h>

The extent to which domestic manufacturers have experienced a
competitive advantage as a result of the depreciation of the
Australian dollar is dependent on the pricing responses of
importers of competing goods, and the impact of the
depreciation on domestic costs of production. One aspect of the
latter is the extent to which the prices of imported materials
and components have increased as a result of the depreciation.

Over any given period, changes in landed duty-paid prices of
imports can reflect a variety of factors - for example,
movements in exchange rates, fob prices in foreign currencies,
freight and insurance costs, and tariff rates. The dramatic
fall in the Australian dollar which began in February 1985 was
clearly the most important factor which affected price changes
of imported materials and components during 1985. However,
Australian dollar prices of imports may not change by the full
extent of the depreciation if overseas suppliers choose to
absorb some or all of the effect of the exchange rate change
by reducing their Australian export prices in terms of their
own currency.

<h>4.3.1 Changes in prices of imported materials and components </h>

Of the eighty-two manufacturing firms directly importing
materials and components, sixty-six provided information on how
prices of these inputs changed during 1985, and how prices were
expected to change during the first half of 1986. The half-
yearly and annual information is presented in Figure 4.1, while
the more detailed quarterly data are set out in Appendix Table
A4.1. Seventy-seven firms provided data on price movements for
all imported inputs used, i.e. those imported directly and also
those purchased from local importers. Because the price changes
in both series were very similar, only the direct imports data
are presented.

Across all firms, the most substantial changes in prices paid
for imported inputs took place in the first half of 1985. On
average, prices increased at a rate of 7.1 per cent in the
March quarter, and 8.3 per cent over the June quarter, giving
a compound rate of 16.0 per cent for the first half of 1985.

The rate of increase in the prices of imported inputs moderated
somewhat in the second half of 1985. Over the full year, prices
of imported inputs increased, on average, by 26 per cent. The 
rate of increase is expected to slow still further over the
first half

<note> GRAPH</note>

of 1986. For this period, the firms surveyed expected prices
of imported inputs to rise at a rate of only about one-third
that of the first half of 1985.

There are substantial interindustry differences in the
magnitude of price increases charged by overseas suppliers to
domestic manufacturers following the depreciation. Price
increases appear to have been well above average in Wood, wood
products and furniture, and Appliances and electrical
equipment. The speed with which price increases for imported
inputs took place is also of considerable interest. A measure
of the speed of price adjustment is provided by the ratio of
the first quarter price increase to the annual increase. On
this basis, price increases were transmitted relatively quickly
in Textiles, Fabricated metal products, Transport equipment,
Appliances and electrical equipment, and Industrial machinery
and equipment (refer Appendix Table A4.1). For these
industries, approximately one-third or more of the annual
increase was passed on within the first quarter of 1985. The
largest impact was felt after a lag of at least one quarter in
Wood, wood products and furniture, Paper and paper products,
Chemical products, and Basic metal products.

<h>4.3.2 Sourcing of imports of materials and components </h>

The observed price increases for imported materials and
components faced by manufacturers reflect, in part, the
different countries of origin of these imports and the
different degrees of absorption of the effects of the
depreciation by overseas suppliers. To shed some light on these
aspects, an examination is made of the countries from which the
imports of the respondent firms were sourced, and the extent
to which the Australian dollar depreciated against the
currencies of these countries.

The major countries from which imports of materials and
components were sourced by the respondent firms in 1985 are set
out in Table 4.7. Across all industries, the major source
countries were the United States, Japan and West Germany. Other
countries tended to be important only in particular industries - 
for example, New Zealand in Textiles and Paper and paper
products, Canada in Non-metallic mineral products and Paper and
paper products, and Asian countries in Clothing and footwear.

</sample>



<sample><id> H12 </id>

<note> 2032 words </note>

<source> Australia card: planning report on the establishment and administration
of a national identification system </source>

<h> CHAPTER 2 </h>

<h> PROPOSED OPERATIONAL STRATEGY </h>

<h>2.1      Objectives, functions and uses of the Australia Card Program </h>

2.1.1     Within the context of the Government's desire to
provide fairer and more equitable taxation and welfare systems,
it is the Commission's understanding that the principal
objective of the Australia Card Program is to establish a
mechanism for the unique identification of persons within
Australia, and by this process to:

(a) reduce the incidence of -

    &bullet; tax evasion

    &bullet; incorrect payment of health and welfare benefits and
      other government moneys

    &bullet; other abuses of government programs; and

(b) generally assist government agencies to carry out their
    functions more effectively.

2.1.2     The functions of the Australia Card Program are to
provide a framework of identification within Australia which
will aid in the positive identification of:

(a) participants in specified financial transactions (for
    taxation purposes);

(b) persons lawfully entitled to undertake work in Australia;

(c) persons entitled to Commonwealth Government pensions,
    income support payments and assistance under other government
    programs;

(d) persons entitled to Medicare benefits;

(e) persons entitled to an Australian passport; and

(f) persons seeking to register for employment with the
    Commonwealth Employment Service.

2.1.3     Whilst the Program clearly will not be a panacea for
all the ills of tax evasion (particularly in relation to the
cash economy and organised crime), it can successfully achieve
the stated objectives and perform the functions listed above.

2.1.4     Appendix D outlines the uses of the Australia Card
and register which are intended by the Government and are
detailed in the Government's submission to the Joint Select
Committee.

2.1.5     The operational objectives outlined in Section 2.3
below have been developed after careful consideration of these
objectives, functions and uses and the system requirements that
they imply.

<h>2.2       Companion system for entities </h>

2.2.1     The most significant revenue gains expected from the
Australia Card Program are those arising from the taxation
uses. To prevent the transfer or leakage of these revenue gains
to entities, the Government has accepted the need for a
companion system for such entities. In this context, "entity"
means any organisation or association (whether incorporated or
unincorporated) and includes persons engaging in transactions
in joint names.

2.2.2     The companion system for entities proposed by the
Australian Taxation Office is outlined in Appendix E. It does
not involve the allocation of a separate unique number to each
entity but relies instead on a requirement that, where an
entity engages in a prescribed transaction, the Australia Card
of an appropriate responsible individual associated with the
entity is required to validate the transaction.

2.2.3     The companion entity system will be administered by
the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). Whilst it should have
little effect on the administration of the Australia Card
Program by the Commission, it is recognised that:

(a) the establishment and maintenance of the highest
    practicable level of integrity for the Australia Card Program
    will be critical not only to the success of that Program but
    also to the effective operation of the companion entity system;
    and

(b) continuing liaison with the ATO will be necessary to
    identify promptly areas of mutual concern or issues on which
    the policies or practices of one organisation may have
    implications for the other organisation.

<h>2.3       Operational objectives </h>

2.3.1     The broad operational requirements for the
administration of the Australia Card Program by the Commission
are that the system should be able to:

(a) register, with a very high level of integrity, every
    eligible person and allocate an Australia Card number to every
    registered person;

(b) issue Australia Cards in respect of all registered persons;

(c) receive data from government agencies to establish records
    and verify identity and eligibility;

(d) provide information to government agencies necessary for
    approved uses of the Program.

2.3.2     The Commission regards integrity as the cornerstone of the
Australia Card Program. It is a central issue that is critical
to the success of the Program in terms of both the achievement
of its objectives and its acceptance by the general community. It
is for this reason that integrity has been made the first
operational objective below; it is addressed in more
comprehensive terms in Section 2.6 below.

2.3.3     The principal operational objectives for the
establishment and administration of the Program are taken to
be:

(a) to achieve the highest practicable level of integrity for
     the data on the Australia Card register;

(b) to ensure that the optimum safeguards and controls are in
    place to protect the integrity of the system and the privacy
    of individuals and personal information relating to them;

(c) to register and issue Australia Cards to at least 96% of
    eligible persons over the two year implementation period and
    subsequently to the entire eligible population;

(d) in the ongoing phase, to reissue cards as required and to
    register the newborn and new arrivals from other countries in
    a timely manner;

(e) to pay particular attention to the needs of (and, where
    necessary, to make specific arrangements for) special groups
    such as people in remote locations, people from Aboriginal
    and ethnic communities, institutionalised persons and
    Australians overseas;

(f) to develop, implement and administer the Program so as to
    minimise public inconvenience;

(g) to provide ready access for cardholders to their own data
    on the Australia Card register;

(h) to provide (in a manner consistent with (b) above) on-line
    and other appropriate enquiry facilities to enable
    authorised government agencies to access the Australia Card
    register and to provide update information to those user
    agencies in a timely manner to assist in the effective
    operation of their programs; and

(i) to operate with the lowest possible administrative costs
    consistent with these objectives.

2.3.4     The operational strategy outlined in this chapter is
designed to achieve these objectives and has been used in the
preparation of the estimated work volumes, resource
requirements, costs and timescales provided in this report.

2.3.5     It should be appreciated, however, that some aspects
of this operational strategy may be revised following the
further planning and evaluation referred to in Section 5.4.

<h>2.4       Overview of operational strategy </h>

2.4.1     For the general community, the principal impact of
the Australia Card Program during the two year implementation
phase will be the arrangements for registration of eligible
persons and the issue of Australia Cards. Invitations to apply
for registration, based on matching of the Medicare database
against other government databases, will be posted
progressively over the first 20 months of the implementation
period. The invitations will request completion and return of
an application for registration.

2.4.2     After further checking of the information supplied
by the applicant, he will be asked to phone a toll-free central
enquiry number for the relevant State and make an appointment
for a registration interview at a convenient branch office. At
that interview, the applicant will provide proof of identity
and eligibility and a signature for inclusion on his Australia
Card.

2.4.3     Special publicity arrangements during the last four
months of the two year implementation phase will encourage
those who have not received invitations to apply for
registration.

2.4.4     The registration arrangements outlined in the three
preceding paragraphs are described in more detail in Section
2.11 and its supporting Appendix M.

2.4.5     Australia Cards will be produced at a secure central
site using automated techniques and will be distributed under
security conditions. They will be made available for collection
at Commission branch offices 2 - 3 weeks after the registration
interview.

2.4.6     It is recognised that special arrangements will be
essential for various groups in the community who will not be
able to visit a branch office or who will require special
attention in other ways -- these arrangements are discussed in
Section 2.14 below.

2.4.7     Other essential elements of the Commission's proposed
operational strategy are that:

(a) the Commission will continue to operate as one organisation
    with its several functions -- Medicare, Medibank Private and
    Australia Card -- all carried out within the existing
    integrated structure;

(b) a three stage computer matching process (using the Medicare
    enrolment file as the base) will be used during the
    registration process to establish and validate identity and
    eligibility;

(c) the Australia Card register will contain data on each
    registered person including basic personal information 
    (name, address, sex, date of birth etc.), personal information
    required to establish identity and eligibility (e.g. birth
    certificate or immigration details), card issue details, audit
    trail information, and, depending on the views of the Joint
    Select Committee and the wishes of the community, optional
    emergency information,

(d) the Australia Card will contain name, number, sex, date of
    birth, period of validity, citizen/resident/visitor status,
    signature (on adult cards), name and number of responsible
    adult (on children's cards), eligibility for Medicare and
    authority to work (visitors' cards), and appropriate security
    features;

(e) the promotional plan to explain the program and to
    encourage registration will include brochure distribution
    through government agencies, a national letterbox drop and
    reinforcement advertising through press, radio and TV;

(f) cardholders will have access to their record on the
    register (subject to some limitations mentioned later);

(g) authorised government agencies will have access (by on-line
    computer terminal or other appropriate means) to the
    register for approved purposes;

(h) the data on the register will be maintained using
    information supplied by cardholders (and relevant government
    agencies) and updated information will be available immediately
    to authorised users;

(i) Australia Cards will replace Medicare cards entirely during
    the 2 year implementation phase; and

(j) the Commission will install and operate a computer system
    for State registries of births, deaths and marriages.

<h>2.5       Privacy, rights of access and appeal mechanisms </h>

2.5.1     As indicated in Appendix B the Australia Card
proposal has received strong public support as a general system
of identification and as a means of reducing tax evasion and
welfare fraud. However, it has been criticised by civil
liberties groups and others who fear that the Program may lead
to an erosion of personal privacy and individual liberty
through the possible creation of dossiers on individuals or
uses of the system beyond those intended.

2.5.2     It is clear that if human rights and personal privacy
are to be protected, adequate legislative safeguards and
administrative controls will be essential. At the same time,
comprehensive information program explaining Australia Card
and these safeguards and controls should alleviate the concerns
that have been expressed.

2.5.3    Chapter 14 of the Government's submission to the Joint
Select Committee discusses privacy and human rights issues and
describes the legislative controls and safeguards proposed by
the Government. In particular, it outlines the role of the
proposed Data Protection Agency which would, inter alia,
provide an external appeals mechanism for the review of
decisions made by the Commission or other government agencies
in relation to data held on or obtained from the Australia Card
register. Chapter 16 of the Government's submission details the
proposed internal review mechanisms and rights of appeal
concerning disputes and complaints arising from Australia Card
data and procedures.

2.5.4     Appendix F of this report summarises these issues and
describes how the legislative requirements would be reflected
in the Commission's administration of the Program. That
appendix also explains the arrangements for access to the
register:

(a) by each cardholder enabling him to check the accuracy of
    the personal information held on the register which relates to
    him; and

(b) by approved user agencies to personal information on the
    register enabling them to carry out the functions for which
    approval has been granted.

<h>2.6       Integrity of the Program </h>

2.6.1     A major determinant of the integrity and success of
the Program will be the effectiveness of the validation of
identity and eligibility prior to the allocation of an
Australia Card number and issue of the Card. However, the only
way in which integrity -- in this context -- could be
guaranteed would be to make the checks on identity and
eligibility absolutely exhaustive.

2.6.2     To apply exhaustive checks for each person would not
be acceptable to the general community and would be seen as an
unnecessary intrusion into personal privacy.  It must be understood, however, that any system with checks that are less than exhaustive -- including the system proposed in this report, despite the range of safeguards that is being contemplated -- will inevitably have some potential for exploitation by those who are really determined.

</sample>




<sample><id> H13 </id>

<note> 2001 words </note>

<source> Report of the committee to review library services in South Australia </source>

<h> CHAPTER 3 </h>
<h> SECOND STAGE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME </h>

3.1 The 1978 Report recommended that a State Plan be adopted to
develop 99 public libraries throughout South Australia over an
eight year period. (Recommendation 20). The Development Programme
to achieve this State plan has been highly successful, even though
not all libraries proceeded in the shape or in the time frame as
planned. Appendix II compares the proposed and actual progress of
the Development Programme from 1978/79 to 1985/86.

The Development Programme has had to be extended to 1986/87 because
of the increased number of independent service points sought. This
occurred in the school/community library area where the number will
have increased from twenty eight to forty six by the end of the
Programme. District Councils clearly preferred the static library
alternative to the regional mobiles initially proposed. Despite the
increase in the number of service points and the year's extension
to the Programme, the overall capital estimate provided in 1978 has
proved to be extremely accurate. It is a credit both to the
Department of Local Government and the Libraries Board that costs
have been so closely aligned to the original budget, bearing in
mind both the inflation rate and, more recently, the devaluation
of the Australian dollar.

3.2 At the time of preparation of this Report, only five District
Councils have not yet decided to establish library services under
the Development Programme, (Appendix III). Negotiations are
currently underway with several of these District Councils,
Yankalilla, Gumeracha, Mt. Pleasant and Robertstown and the
Committee anticipates that services will be established in 1986/87.
Three other councils, the District Councils of Carrieton,
Peterborough and Hallett, are too small to establish services in
their own right. Of these three, Hallett appears likely to seek a
service from an adjoining council when the two Institutes within
its boundaries dissolve.

Only one metropolitan council does not contribute to a library
service. However, we believe the Glenelg Council has approved in
principle the development of a public library service but has not,
to this time, made any commitment as to its location.

3.3 The Committee considers the above scenario to be a remarkable
overall achievement. In all cases local government authorities were
free to make their own decisions as to whether or not to provide
a public library service. The success of the spread of public
library services throughout the State is due in no small measure
to the persuasive skills of the Libraries Board and Public
Libraries Branch officers in the first instance and more
importantly to the success of the first few libraries established.
It was quite evident to the Committee that the stanard of service
offered and the level of use made by the community were clearly
very influential factors in convincing neighbouring authorities
that a public library was a desirable community service.

The support for this Development Programme and its extension was
shown in the large number of submissions received from local
authorities by the Committee. Sixty one of the State's 125 local
authorities made submissions.

3.4 The Committee has identified the need for a smaller second
stage Development Programme which would provide for:

    (1) replacement or extension of existing service points      
        which are now inadequate or too small                    
    (2) new services in areas where population growth is        
        expected to occur over the next five to ten years.

In the first stage of the Development Programme, the Board was keen
to establish services wherever it could. In same cases existing
Institute buildings or rented shops were used because no other
suitable alternative premises were available at the time. The
Committee believes consideration should now be given to improving
these library services because in most cases conditions are
cramped, with little public space and with books stored in such a
way that public use is severely restricted. In most instances, the
councils involved recognise the problem and are anxious to find a
remedy.

The Committee envisages a total of twenty six projects during this
second stage. In addition, Penola, Prospect and Jamestown Councils
have indicated a need for minor capital developments. Some
school/community libraries, especially in the north and west of the
State, are also in need of additional space. These costs are
relatively small and if proceeded with, would have a negligible
financial effect on the total programme.

3.5 Although there is clearly a need for extensions or replacements
of the library services identified, the situation is certainly not
as critical as it was in 1978, when relatively few library services
existed. Most councils have indicated that they see such projects
as part of their own forward plans. A similar situation exists with
new libraries. In all cases library services exist in these areas,
either through a neighbouring library or mobile service.

If a second stage Development Programme was implemented over eight
years, the number of libraries to be built or redeveloped each year
would be less than half those currently being established. Although
this slower growth rate will represent a substantial reduction in
the cost to the State Government, it will be offset to some extent
by the Committee's proposal to increase the establishment capital
subsidy as detailed in our Review of the Subsidy System.

13. The committee recommends that:

The State Government accept a commitment to a second stage capital
Development Programme to be implemented over an eight year period,
to provide in the first instance an opportunity for existing
libraries with inadequate space to be expanded or replaced and
secondly, for new libraries to be established in areas of forecast
population growth. Estimated capital cost for 1987 - 1996 is
$4,456,275.

<h> Joint-Use Libraries </h>

3.6 South Australia has been a standard bearer for joint-use
services, with more services provided in this State than all other
States combined. The success of such services here, the Committee
believes, is due to the sound policy framework and the planning and
operation standards that have been applied. A Joint-Use Libraries
Advisory Committee considers all applications in relation to the
policy guidelines before making recommendations to the Libraries
Board. The School/Community Libraries Committee has also been very
successful as the establishment vehicle for new libraries in rural
areas and has carefully monitored their performance.

The Committee was impressed with the consistency in the standards
of services provided from joint-use libraries when compared with
separate public libraries. This was particularly noticeable in the
country areas where school/community libraries offered a cheaper,
but nevertheless highly satisfactory service. The levels of public
membership and use were indistinguishable between the two types of
libraries.

3.7 Joint-Use Library Services with T.A.F.E. colleges have also
prospered. Twelve examples of co-operative provision with local
government were noted, most of which have involved placing a
college or branch library collection in a neighbouring public
library for community use. In four localities, however,
comprehensive joint college and public library services have been
established on college premises and a fifth service is in the
process of being established. In particular, the success of the
Noarlunga Library has demonstrated that, even in large metropolitan
communities, such joint-use is able to offer additional dimensions
of service not otherwise available, either to the colleges
concerned or to the general public. Other joint-use services
involving T.A.F.E. colleges may occur in the future, depending on
developmental priorities in T.A.F.E. and the location of future
colleges.

3.8 The Committee has carried out a needs analysis for future joint
use libraries. A survey of schools in the metropolitan area was
undertaken to establish possible joint ventures. A number of
possibilities were considered, but at this stage, only the Magill
and Morphett Vale East sites are currently under consideration.
Possibilities also exist for joint developments in Thebarton, Tea
Tree Gully at Golden Grove, Happy Valley and in the Munno Para City
Council as populations expand.

3.9 The Committee noted that the potential public use of joint-use
libraries in the metropolitan area was restricted by up to 40%
where a site away from a major retail shopping area was chosen. In
many cases potential school sites did not have the benefit of good
location and had to be rejected on these grounds. In these cases,
the cost savings from a joint-service would have been negated by
a much restricted level of use.

Location did not have the same significance in country areas where
school/Community libraries up to one kilometre from the town centre
still showed high levels of use.

14.The Committee recommends that:

Where opportunities are presented, both councils and appropriate
Government Departments seriously consider establishing joint-use
or multi-use services because of the benefits to the community and
the total cost-savings that result.


3.10 The Committee considered the future development of the
school/community libraries programme and noted the Education
Department's concern over the escalation in cost due to the
increase in the number of services from twenty eight to forty six.
The Committee has addressed this problem in detail and our
recommendations for change are given in the chapter on School
Community Libraries.

The Committee does not foresee any further school/community
libraries being built, except possibly Roxby Downs. All remaining
unserved communities in the unincorporated areas are too small even
for a school/community library.

<h> Country Lending Service </h>

3.11 The small communities and individual homesteads not directly
served by their own public library service currently receive
library materials from the Country Lending Service of the State
Library's Lending Service. As a result of the development
programme, the number of borrowers requiring this service has
steadily declined from 10,867 in 1978 to 646 in 1985.

The Committee envisages that by 1987/88, the number of people
eligible to continue receiving the service will be less than one
hundred. It will be appropriate at that stage to transfer the
responsibility for the provision of the service from the centrally
provided Country Lending Service to the most appropriate local
library.

The Committee notes that to same extent, this is already occurring
in the case of some libraries bordering the outback. Port Augusta,
Peterborough and Coober Pedy have reported a number of such users.
The Committee considers that additional financial support should
be provided to councils where such mail services need to be
provided.

15. The Committee recommends that:

The mailing service presently operated by the Country Lending
Service of the State Library be transferred in 1987/88 to the
appropriate public library, and a grant based on the present method
of paying for library services to unincorporated areas, be made to
local libraries providing this service.

<h> Institutes </h>

3.12 One of the major changes resulting from the 1978 Report was
the decision to phase out the Institute subscription library
service in favour of free public libraries. The 1978*]978 Report
considered that the free and wide ranging service being offered by
public libraries would more effectively meet the needs of the
community. This has been clearly demonstrated by the membership of
public libraries which now stands at 562,000, over thirty six times
the Institute membership in 1978.

The implementation of the Development Programme has relied very
much on the co-operation of both the Institutes Association and
the individual Institutes themselves. In many cases the dissolution
of a long standing Institute library causes a great deal of sadness
amongst its members. In all cases however, the dissolutions have
come about voluntarily and considerable efforts have been made to
ensure a smooth transition of services to former Institute members.

In some eighteen cases, predominantly in the metropolitan area,
the local Institute has continued to operate as a private library
relying on the "box book scheme" which is a circulating collection
operated by the Institute association. Financial support has been
provided through membership subscriptions and invested funds.

3.13 Once the public libraries approved in the final stage of the development 
programme are opened, twenty-one subsidised Institutes will remain.
Of these, at the most eight, and more likely four, are expected to 
continue after 1986/87. Already the viability of the "box book scheme"
is causing concern and it is unlikely that sufficient income will be 
generated from the remaining Institutes in 1986/87 for it to continue
beyond that date.   

</sample>



<sample><id> H14 </id>

<note> 2023 words </note>

<source> New South Wales State Water Plan
Water Policies for the Future. A Report to the Minister for Natural Resources
by the State Water Plan Task Force 
Water Resources Commission, New South Wales </source>


<h>7.2.4     Transfer of Rural Water Allocations </h>

<h> Transfer of Irrigation Surface Water Allocations </h>

In a growing economy there is continual autonomous, or natural, adjustment
by businesses to changing circumstances.  Adjustment may mean changing the
proportion of inputs used, the production process, the products produced,
or the location of the production process.  In the long term, industries
will come and go, be prosperous or unprofitable and grow or shrink.  The
steel, coal, irrigated horticulture and dairy industries are all examples
of industries that have undergone major changes in recent times.

By and large, this adjustment process occurs naturally as part of the country's
economic and social development and in response to trading relationships
with the rest of the world. Even so, there are frequent barriers to this
natural process of adjustment - barriers that may not prevent adjustment
occurring altogether but rather that slow it to a degree that causes problems
to emerge.  Typical symptoms of these barriers are low incomes within
identifiable groups and price levels that are much higher in Australia than
for similar products elsewhere.

State and Commonwealth Government policies for the rural sector have, since
the early 1970s, paid significant attention to facilitating adjustment to
change.  The 1980s will continue to see policy emphasis on encouraging the
rural sector to adjust to change.  To do otherwise will only defer adjustment
that would occur eventually anyway and which then would be more costly in
terms of welfare problems and lower economic growth, and which would restrain
the distribution of benefits from change.  Capacity to adjust will be essential
to the irrigation industry as the price of water is increased to reduce
the gap between the revenue and the recurrent costs of the rural water supply
and distribution systems. 

One means of providing farm management flexibility in the face of change,
and of improving the allocation of water, is to allow transfer of water
or water entitlements between irrigators on a rental or a sale (permanent)
basis.

A water transfer scheme can also provide progressive irrigators with the
incentive and the means to substantially improve on-farm efficiency at little
or no financial cost.  By exploiting more water-efficient techniques such
as spray, drip and micro-irrigation and land forming, a proportion of an
irrigator's water allocation could become surplus to requirements.  This
surplus allocation could then be either rented annually or sold to another
irrigator, so providing additional income which could be used to pay-off
the capital invested in the new irrigation techniques and perhaps provide
some additional cash as a reward for more efficient water use.

Further, with the maturity of the water system, resource management, rather
than further development, has become the main avenue for progress in the
industry.  The drought of the early 1980s, one of the worst on record,
reinforced this view by confirming that storages alone could not save
irrigators from prolonged drought.  It is now considered that water management
mechanisms aimed at providing irrigators with greater flexibility in making
use of meagre water supplies might be more effective in alleviating some
of the problems of drought.

From the Water Resources Commission's experience with a trial surface water
transfer scheme introduced for the 1983/84 irrigation season and continued
into the 1984/85 season, there does not appear to be any impediment to allowing
annual water transfers to continue in future.

Annual water transfer arrangements would operate on the basis of the sale
of a `volume' of water rather than the sale of entitlements to water.  In
each case, the water entitlement would remain with the existing licence
holder.  Because water entitlements would not be traded, changes to the
Water and Irrigation Acts are not envisaged.

The annual transfer arrangements could operate much like the existing temporary
scheme with a number of conditions made less restrictive.  In particular,
the transfers would be possible in any season irrespective of the water
supply situation at the commencement of the season.  This is in contrast
to the existing temporary scheme which only allows transfers in most river
valleys if the initial allocation is less than 100 per cent and then limits
the amount available for transfer to the difference between the initial
announced allocation and an irrigator's full allocation.  At this stage,
merit is seen in allowing irrigators to trade up to an amount of water
equivalent to their full allocation in any season.

Permanent transfer of water entitlements (that is, the sale of water
entitlements) is more complex.  First, in order to ensure an effective market,
permanent water entitlements need to be more specific in terms of volume
and more secure in reliability of supply.  The Water Act and the Irrigation
Act would need amendment to allow the present volumetric allocations to
become the legal entitlement in irrigation areas and districts rather than
the now virtually-superseded water right.

Second, permanent water transfers on a large scale may over-tax the supply
capacity in some parts of the river systems, or of channels and drains within
irrigation areas and districts.  There are definite economies in operating
area and district distribution systems at or near full capacity.  Permanent
transfer of water away from any part of this distribution network may erode
these economies, making the systems more costly to operate per unit of
delivered water and, in turn, making water more expensive for the remaining
users.  Significant transfer of water away from any part of the network
may make it both physically and economically impractical to operate.  Further,
a concentration of water use in some localities could exacerbate existing
or potential water logging and salinity problems.

Finally, there is concern by some irrigators in the irrigation areas and
districts that the introduction of marketable transfers will force the small
landholder out of irrigation.  There is also a concern that permanent transfers
could encourage corporate interest in irrigation and, in time, permit
substantial corporate ownership of irrigation area holdings.  It is feared
that this will mean diversion of farm profits and purchases away from local
businesses and have adverse effects on civic and community amenities.  There
is no evidence to support these views.  Marketable transfers are just like
the sale or rental of any other property - the seller/renter does so only
if satisfied with the price or rental.  In this way, ownership of entitlements
to water is similar to land ownership and the ability to trade water or
water entitlements is similar to land transactions.  The relative freedom
from restriction of a large component of the rural land market outside the
irrigation areas has not led to the demise of the family farm and there is
no evidence to suggest that marketable water transfers will increase the
chances of this happening.  More likely, by providing the family farm with
more flexibility to adjust and a means of exchanging capital assets for
cash (either water rental income or proceeds from outright sale), the farm's
and the local community's chances of survival and betterment will be enhanced.

The concept of permanent transfers is definitely worthy of further detailed
consideration.  Permanent transfers are the only means by which long-term
permanent changes in water demand can be accommodated.  Presently, the concept
of permanent transfer is not well accepted by the irrigation community and
there are obvious operational and economic difficulties in its application
in the irrigation areas and districts.  Outside the areas and districts,
licensed pumpers have expressed concern that, in periods of low financial
returns (due to poor seasons or commodity prices), irrigators with substantial
borrowings may be forced to sell some, or all, of their entitlement in order
to meet financial commitments where otherwise financial institutions mostly
would have accommodated their needs.  To safeguard against such a situation,
licensed pumpers argue that annual transfers provide adequate flexibility
in water management.

<h> Intersectoral Transfers </h>

From a standpoint of economic efficiency, there is no reason why water should
not be transferred between distinctly different uses.  Increased economic
efficiency will clearly result from a shift of water from irrigation, which
is a relatively low value use, to other uses such as power generation, town
water and industry where a demand for water for these purposes exists.

It can be argued that such improvements in economic efficiency may be gained
at the expense of income distribution and wealth.  Because the impacts of
major water re-allocation may be significant, these should be quantified
and evaluated before transfers between sectors are permitted.

A major consideration in intersectoral entitlement transfer is the vastly
different capacity to pay of*off buyers from different sectors - industry
and towns will always be able to outbid irrigators.  This provides the party
with the greater capacity to pay with far greater leverage in the bargaining
process, particularly as irrigators generally have imperfect knowledge about
water in alternative uses.  This suggests that intersectoral transfers should
not be by private treaty as in the annual water transfer arrangements. 
Rather the Water Resources Commission could `broker' intersectoral transfers
- buying from irrigators at a capitalized price derived from prevailing
prices for annual irrigation transfers and selling at a price in keeping
with the new users' preparedness to pay.  Agreement to intersectoral
entitlement transfers will require detailed investigation of this and other
aspects and a policy will need to be developed in close consultation with
all interested parties.

Annual transfer arrangements need not prohibit intersectoral transfer. 
Apart from very dry seasons when water sharing arrangements restrict all
sectors, it is doubtful whether there are many other occasions when actual
transfers would be attractive to non-irrigation users.  At times when transfers
may be attractive, short-term policies could be developed in consultation
with all water users and applications to transfer could be assessed on a
case-by-case basis.

<h> Transfer of Groundwater Allocations </h>

The rationale for allowing surface water allocations to be transferred among
users has just been discussed.  A similar rationale applies to groundwater.
Initial allocations for the major aquifers are being determined.  If these
allocations are not transferable, the initial allocations will determine
the long-term efficiency of water use, as the inefficient farm is allocated
the same water as the efficient farm.  In many respects, the relative
efficiency of the initial allocations is not critical provided that
re-allocation can take place over time to achieve optimum efficiency.

Provisions for transferability have been included in the allocation schemes
so far developed.  But transferability of groundwater allocations must be
governed by the physical characteristics of aquifers.  The effects of excessive
withdrawals in some areas, such as local drawdown of water levels, must
be examined before transfers are allowed.  Implicit in this is that the
Water Resources Commission must have adequate knowledge of possible aquifer
behaviour so that quick decisions can be made on whether individual transfers
should be allowed.

Transfers of allocations between different sectors - for example, irrigation
and industry - to meet future demands for water, have*has also been discussed.
For groundwater this is also an option, particularly if the adopted life
of the aquifer is to be adhered to.  However, the nature of groundwater
is quite different to surface water and there are more options available
to meet emerging demands.  Thus, it is best if each situation is examined
case by case to determine the best way to meet these demands.  However,
clear provisions should be available in the legislation to allow both temporary
and permanent transfers of water allocations, subject to physical
characteristics of the aquifer.

<h> Future Action </h>

Given that presently there is little knowledge or understanding of the social,
economic and operational impacts of permanent transfers, the best course
appears to be to allow annual water transfers in any season, regardless
of the surface water supply situation, and to allow irrigators to trade
any volume of water up to the equivalent of their full allocation.
Intersectoral annual transfers should be permitted, although each proposal
to do so should conform with guidelines for such transfers developed by
the Water Resources Commission in consultation with local water users and
other interested parties.

Further investigation must be undertaken of options for permanent transfer of water entitlements of surface water and groundwater. Ultimately, permanent transfer, particularly of surface water, will be essential to reallocate water entitlements to higher value users either within a sector or on an intersectoral basis.

</sample>



<sample><id> H15 </id>

<note> 2013 words </note>

<source> New South Wales coal resources and reserves </source>

<bl> M Sniffin, P Sayers, J Beckett </bl>

<h>2.1 SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES </h>

The aim of this volume is to provide the following information:

&bullet; To present the coal resources and reserves for New South Wales
  on a coalfield basis in a useable and concise format.

&bullet; To present a general picture of each coalfield and to discuss:
  geology, mining methods, coal seam geology, seam quality, and coal
  utilization in each area.

&bullet; To delineate areas of both sterilized or uncategorized coal and
  to discuss the factors which determine this.

The coal resources of the Sydney - Gunnedah Basin were designated
as the primary focus of this study. The smaller coal bearing
provinces of the Oaklands, Gloucester and Ashford Basins have also
been assessed. The Cranky Corner Basin has been included with the
Newcastle Coalfield of the Sydney Basin. Minor coal deposits in the
Clarence-Moreton Basin and the Clyde Coal Measures of the Sydney
Basin have been excluded because of their negligible economic
importance.

<h>2.2 DEFINITION OF COAL RESOURCE AND RESERVE CATEGORIES </h>

The coal resources and reserves contained in each authorisation, 
colliery holding, and other areas not held by title were determined 
by applying the Fifth Edition of the Standing Committee on Coalfield 
Geology of N.S.W. "Code for Calculating Resources and Reserves", 
(N.S.W. Geological Survey Records 22(1), 1984), which is included 
as Appendix 1.

A national code for reporting coal resources and reserves was
ratified in April 1986 by the Government Geologists Conference and
was adopted in June 1986 by the Standing Committee on Coalfield
Geology of N.S.W. This code, referred to as the "Australian Code
for Reporting Identified Coal Resources and Reserves" makes
provision for two classes of Inferred Resources; Class 1 which is
equivalent to the Assumed category of the Code presented herein,
and Class 2 Inferred Resources. The Class 2 category is broadly
equivalent to the previous category of Inferred Resources. The
majority of the coal resource data was supplied prior to
ratification of the 1986 national code and consequently resources
within this document are reported according to the 1984 "Code for
Calculating Coal Resources and Reserves".

Coal resources for each coalfield in New South Wales have been
categorized according to the level of confidence to which they have
been assessed. This confidence level is dependent upon the density
of exploration data available and the extrapolation of information
from these points of observation (Figure 2.1). Definitions for each
category (i.e. Measured, Indicated, Assumed and Inferred) are given
in Appendix 1.

Coal reserves in this publication are reported in categories of
Recoverable and Marketable Reserves. These estimates are obtained
only from the calculated Measured and Indicated Resources and then
only when a mine plan exists for the extraction of the coal.
Consequently, the Recoverable and Marketable (saleable) Reserves
often represent only a small proportion of the reported coal
resources.

Application of this code allows the various categories of Measured
to Inferred Resources and Recoverable to Marketable Reserves in
each coalfield to be grouped on a mining method and depth of cover
basis. Additional criteria for seam thickness and coal quality are
incorporated into this assessment as shown in Table 2.1.

<note> TABLE </note>

In this report, potential open cut coal resources are defined
as coal which occurs at depths of less than 300 metres and with
a linear overburden to coal thickness ratio (stripping ratio)
of less than 10:1. Although mine plans exist for deep open cut
deposits, coal is presently being mined to a limit of
approximately 150 metres when the stripping ratio is 6:1 or
less. Most current open cut mines in New South Wales range from
60 to 80 metres deep with stripping ratios ranging from 5:1 to
7:1.

The majority of underground mines in the State are operating
at depths of less than 300 metres where linear overburden to
coal thickness ratios exceed 10:1. The minimum mineable working
thickness is usually 1.5 metres which allows miners and
machinery to operate comfortably. Most underground mining in
New South Wales is by bord and pillar methods using continuous
miners to extract the coal, but an increasing number of
longwall units are being installed in the Southern, Western and
Newcastle Coalfields. In 1984/85 twelve longwall units were in
operation with an additional two installed in the latter part
of the year. The average output per unit/shift totalled 1,547
tonnes compared with 337 tonnes for the 238 continuous miners
in use.

Increasing amounts of underground recoverable coal are being
explored for and mined in the 300 to 600 metres depth category.
This is especially true in the Southern Coalfield which
contains the only source of premium hard coking coal in New
South Wales and therefore mining at great depths is
economically feasible. However, it is considered that the 600
metres "economic" depth limit which is presently applied to the
reporting of resources will be increased in the future.

Large areas within most of the major coalfields are poorly
explored and data are insufficient to allow resources to be
reported according to any of the categories defined in Appendix
1. Coal resources in these areas have been grouped as either
"uncategorized" with an estimate given of the total in situ
resources or as "sterilized" with reasons given for this
description.

The reporting of coal resources and reserves in this report is
limited to the criteria which are outlined in Table 2.1. In
addition to this, resources and reserves for each coalfield are
divided into authorisation areas and colliery holdings. Where
possible, individual coal seam names are identified, otherwise
resources and reserves are quoted by formation or subgroup
categories.

This study represents the collation of all available coal
resource data from current coal exploration authorisations,
exploration permits, unallocated areas, and colliery holdings
in New South Wales.

<h>2.3 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS </h>

The Joint Coal Board collected and assessed resource and
reserve data from the colliery holdings. All other information
referred to above was assessed by the Coal Geology Branch of
the Department of Mineral Resources. Statistics used in the
diagrams were compiled from preliminary tables of the Joint
Coal Board statistical yearbook "Black Coal in Australia 1985-
86". The overall assimilation of data, writing of text,
preparation for publication, and editorial responsibility was
conducted by the authors. Acknowledgement to the following
persons is made for their time and effort in compiling the
enormous amount of material which went into preparing this
report: C. Barto was responsible for contacting companies and
assembling the coal resource and reserve data; M. Ives, B.
Kirby and C. Shekhar, geologists with the Joint Coal Board,
supplied the colliery holding data; N. Clarke and P. West
contributed information for same of the chapters. Overall
editorial comment and advice was the responsibility of A.
Galligan. D. Fitzmaurice, K. McDonald, G. Stewart, and A. Valja
drafted the figures for the text, while photographs were
supplied by D. Barnes and M. Sniffin. The manuscript was typed
by A. Pagano.

<h>3.1 INTRODUCTION </h>

Eight important coal rich areas are discussed in this report.
They are the Western, Hunter, Newcastle, and Southern
Coalfields of the Sydney Basin; the Gunnedah Coalfield of the
Gunnedah Basin, and the Gloucester, Oaklands, and Ashford
Basins. The Cranky Corner Basin is included as part of the
Newcastle Coalfield.

The locations of these coalfields are shown in Figure 3.1.
Minor coal bearing sequences in the Clarence-Moreton Basin and
the Clyde Coal Measures of the Sydney Basin are excluded from
this report.

The boundaries used for the coalfields of the Sydney-Gunnedah
Basin are those adopted by the Standing Committee on Coalfield
Geology of N.S.W., (N.S.W. Geological Survey Records 22(1),
1985).

Table 3.1 is presented here to show a broad stratigraphic
correlation of the major coalfields and coal-bearing basins
in New South Wales. As exploration continues and more data are
analyzed, the accuracy of correlation and definition of
stratigraphic boundaries will continue to improve.

The Sydney-Gunnedah Basin contains the majority of coal
resources in New South Wales. It extends for up to 500
kilometres in a northwesterly direction from Ulladulla in the
south to beyond Narrabri in the north.

The coal bearing rocks of the Sydney-Gunnedah Basin are Permian
in age. Overlying rocks of Triassic age or younger generally
form prominent scarps, particularly in the Western and Southern
Coalfields. Mining methods, either open cut or underground, are
often dictated by the presence of this younger cover.

The coalfields of the Sydney - Gunnedah Basin offer a broad
variety of coal types and these are outlined in Table 3.2.
Quality ranges from low volatile matter, hard coking coal, to
high quality, low ash thermal coals. Most of the coal produced
in New South Wales is beneficiated by washing. Depending upon
market requirements, different coal types may be recovered from
the one coal seam. In addition, many coal types are produced
by blending different coals at the port where stackers and
reclaimers can achieve a specified product.

Relevant information about geology, inherent quality, mining
methods, and production from each coalfield is presented in the
following discussion. A more detailed assessment, including the
coal resources and reserves, is given in the individual
coalfield chapters.

<note> TABLE </note>

<h>3.2 WESTERN COALFIELD </h>

The Western Coalfield (Figure 3.1) is bounded to the west by
the western limits of Permian Coal Measures subcrop. It adjoins
the Gunnedah, Hunter and Southern Coalfields to the north, east
and south respectively.

The main coal bearing strata are contained in the Illawarra
Coal Measures. The major seams in the southern and northern
areas of the Western Coalfield are:

          <note> list </note>

The Illawarra Coal Measures are overlain by thick Triassic
sandstone (Narrabeen Group) over most of the southern area.
Coal is mined primarily using underground mining methods.
Currently 13 underground mines and two open cut mines are in
operation.

The Western Coalfield contains substantial resources of high
specific energy thermal coal. Both domestic and export power
generation and cement industry markets are supplied. Quality
characteristics of the major seams as mined (Lithgow, Katoomba,
Ulan) typically yield coals with medium to high ash, low to
moderate sulphur, and medium to high volatile matter content.

Production in 1985/86 from the 14 collieries in the Western
Coalfied totalled 13.8 million tonnes raw coal (Joint Coal
Board figures). A large part of this production came from the
Ulan open cut operation (6 million tonnes) and the Clarence
Mine (1.6 million tonnes).

<h>3.3 HUNTER COALFIELD </h>

The Hunter Coalfield is bounded to the northeast by the Hunter
Thrust System. It adjoins*ajoins the Newcastle, Southern,
Western and Gunnedah Coalfields to the east, south, west, and
north respectively (Figure 3.1).

The coal resources of the Hunter Coalfield are contained
primarily in the Wittingham and Greta Coal Measures. Up to 60
coal seams occur in the region, the most important of which are
listed below:

        <note> lists </note>

In terms of both coal resources and current production, the
Hunter Coalfield is the largest of the State's coalfields. Most
of the coal occurs at comparatively shallow depths and
consequently production is primarily from large scale multi-
seam open cut mines.

Currently 13 open cut mines and 7 underground mines are in
operation in the Hunter Coalfield. Five coal lease application
areas are also pending, and exploration in 34 coal
authorisation areas is actively assessing the resource
potential of the coalfield.

Both export and domestic markets are supplied from the Hunter
Coalfield. Several different coal types are produced which
include:

&bullet; Low ash, medium volatile matter content, soft coking coal for
  export.

&bullet; Low to medium ash, medium to high volatile matter content,
  low sulphur thermal coal for export.

&bullet; Medium to high ash, medium volatile matter content, low sulphur
  coal for domestic power generation.

Most of the export coal is washed and much of it is blended into 
commercial blends of high and consistent quality.

Raw coal production from the Hunter Coalfield during 1985/86 totalled
28.8 million tonnes. Underground production totalled 4.9 million tonnes
while open cut production was 23.9 million tonnes. This represents 37
per cent of the total coal production in the state of New South Wales.

<h>3.4   NEWCASTLE COALFIELD </h>

The Newcastle Coalfield extends along the coast of New South Wales from
the Hawkesbury River in the south to the edge of the Hunter Thrust fault
system in the north.

</sample>



<sample><id> H16 </id>

<note> 2006 words </note>

<source> Draft coastal management plan  Shire of Coorow </source>

<bl> By L. A. Lobry de Bruyn </bl>

<h>2.5	2.5	COASTAL PROCESSES</h>

<h>2.5.1	Introduction </h>

	For any firm conclusions to be made on coastal processes one would need
	quantitative data on wind, wave and tide regimes, beach near-shore
	morphology, and the sediment budget for each bay. However, the above
	data are not available for the project area. The following techniques
	were the only ones available which could be used to deduct
	coastal processes. The techniques are aerial photo+graphical
	interpretation, qualitative observation, extension of studies completed
	in adjacent areas and the educated opinion of resident coastal
	geomorphologists.

<h>2.5.2	Winds </h>

	Summer winds are generally easterlies in the morning and become
	south-south westerlies in the afternoon. The dominant winds are south
	westerlies which blow mostly between 11 kph and 30 kph. It is believed
	that wind speeds greater than 10 kph are responsible for sand movement
	(Wood and Grieve, 1978). In winter, wind direction may vary from the
	north west through to the south. The Bureau of Meteorology wind records
	indicate the main direction and speed of the winds at Jurien Bay (the
	closest meteorological station to the project area).

	During the passage of a tropical cyclone the wind direction may vary but
	usually they are north to north westerlies.

<h>2.5.3	Waves </h>

	The coastline is dominated by two major wave forms - swell and wind
	waves. Swell waves are generally propagated from the south-west but
	their direction may be altered, as they approach the coast, by offshore
	features such as reefs and islands or due to extensions of the shoreline
	by using structures such as jetties. The swell waves are diffracted and
	reflected and break on the beach parallel to the shoreline. Waves
	refract and bend towards the headlands because of the offshore shoal
	area associated with the headland. The wave energy is therefore
	concentrated on the headland, and the wave heights there may be several
	times as large as in the adjacent embayments.

<h>2.5.4	Tides </h>

	The project area on a world scale consists of a mixed tidal regime that
	is predominantly either diurnal or semi-diurnal (Davies, 1980). In the
	mixed tidal regime there are two highs and two lows per day which are
	not of the same magnitude. The tidal range is low and at the spring
	tides the tidal range is approximately less than 2 m. Since the tidal
	range is low in the project area the influence of tide-induced currents
	is limited to constrictions between islands and around headlands.

<h>2.5.5	Sediment Budget </h>

	There are various inputs and outputs in the sediment budget. The inputs
	consist of littoral drift in, onshore transport, and cliff erosion,
	while the outputs are littoral drift out, offshore trans+port and dune
	migration. Each of the above components will briefly be discussed
	(FIGURE 2).

        <note> FIGURE </note>

	The term "sink" is used to cover all those processes whereby sediment is
	lost to the coastal system. The first sink is represented by the
	migration of dunes inland where they can no longer be acted on by waves
	at times of storm activity and the second by transport offshore onto the
	seafloor.

	Parabolic dunes seem to develop when the dune is no longer receiving new
	sand and begins to wander inland. As the dune travels, the sand body at
	the head is progressively exhausted and the two trailing edges develop
	into long slightly converging ridges. The development of such a sequence
	requires not only time but the frequent occurrence of high velocity
	winds from one major direction. In the project area the wind transport
	is mainly from the south-south west so that the parabolic dunes are
	orientated in a north-south direction. The natural development of dunes
	depends on a fortuitous sequence of events and circumstances.

	Transport of sediment occurs in conjunction with nearshore cell
	circulation and littoral drift. The nearshore cell circulation consists
	of rip currents and feeding longshore currents and is normally generated
	by variations in the wave breaker height along the length of the beach.
	The longshore variations in wave height may be produced either by wave
	refraction causing divergence and convergence of the wave rays or by
	edge waves trapped in the nearshore interacting with normal swell waves.
	Alternative explanations for nearshore circulation have been developed
	by Hino (1975) and Sonu (1972). Longshore currents may also be produced
	by waves breaking at an angle to the shoreline. Exactly what processes
	cause longshore currents in the project area can not be ascertained.

	However, longshore movement of sediment at any beach is the sum of
	transport under all the individual wave trains arriving at the shore
	from numerous wave generation areas. The beaches in the project area
	have north-south orientations and during summer sand may move northward
	for a time due to waves arriving from the south to south-west and then
	later move to the south in winter under waves coming from the north.

	The result of north and south longshore drift is a net dominance of the
	northward transport system. Thus a small amount of sediment is
	continually being moved to the north. This phenomenon is responsible for
	the asymmetric growth of beach ridge plains and erosion on their
	southern flanks.

<h>2.5.6	Shoreline Stabiity and Coastal Erosion </h>

	The recession hazard can be categorised into two main types which pose
	significantly different problems to the coastal planner - the beach sand
	cycle and secular recession.

	<h> Beach Sand Cycle </h>

	The commonly perceived definition of the beach is the interface between
	the ocean and the land at a particular instant. In reality, this zone is
	not static but varies within a definable zone depending on the existing
	weather conditions. During storm events the back beach escarpment will
	move landward as sand is moved offshore to form storm bars which
	dissipate the wave energy. In contrast, during periods of calm weather
	the sand gradually moves back onshore from the bar, rebuilding the beach
	and an incipient foredune. The term used to describe the area which
	encompasses the accreted and storm profile is the dynamic swept prism
	(Chapman and Smith, 1980). This situation does not involve any nett loss
	of sediment from the beach system. However, if development is allowed
	within this dynamic swept prism it may be threatened or lost during a
	severe event (FIGURE 3).

	<h> Secular Recession </h>

	Secular recession is an ongoing landward movement of the erosion
	escarpment associated with an average sediment loss from the coastal
	compartment. Therefore to assess or predict shoreline stability various
	techniques could be used (May et al., 1983). However, sediment budgets
	are generally used to assess the medium term stability of the shoreline.
	No such investigations have been completed for the area. From
	preliminary investigation (29-31 May) of the project area the northern
	ends of the crescentic, sandy bays appear to have wider beach widths and
	are backed by a series of beach ridges. Thus, one could assume that the
	northern ends of the bays are prograding or at least have been
	prograding in the past. However, these areas also have consolidated
	parabolic dunes indicating periods of high sand influx and instability.
	Hence, shoreline instability results from an inbalance between sediment
	removal and sediment supply to the coast. The natural beach exhibits
	short-term fluctuations which are in dynamic equilibrium while over a
	greater period of time it may be prograding or receding.

	<h> Beach Erosion </h>

	Woods (1984) placed the project area into Region 5 (Kalbarri to Cape
	Naturaliste). This section of coastline is characterised by long, sandy
	beaches and rocky limestone headlands, reefs and islands. The sandy
	bays are crescent-shaped and are orientated towards the north.

	The modal form of the beaches in the project area is extremely low
	energy due to the presence of offshore islands and reefs. However, the
	area does experience high energy conditions with the passage of
	extra-tropical cyclones across the coastline. During the field trip
	(29-31 May) minor erosion was observed. For example scarping or
	cliffing along the foredune South of Leeman, erosional cusping along
	the summer berm at South Bay and vast accumulations of seaweed. Erosion
	was more prominent along the southern and central portions of the sandy
	bays. The beaches at South Bay, Squatter Settlement 1, south of and
	including Dynamite Bay, north of Leeman and Green Head jetty are
	showing evidence of erosion. Old dunes are progressively being cut
	back, bench marks have been exposed and there is scarping as well as
	erosional cusping along the sandy bays. At Squatter Settlement 1
	(closest to Green Head) and north of Green Head jetty the erosional
	events are not as recent as vegetation has recolonised the dune system
	and there is a layer of humus underlaying the vegetation. In contrast,
	where the foredunes are low or non existent the beaches are more stable
	and are probably prograding. Most of the erosional activity is
	asssociated with activities such as tracking, off road vehicles, and
	squatter settlement.

<h>2.6	GEOMORPHOLOGY </h>

	Hesp and Gozzard (1983) have included the project area within a
	description and land use capability study of coastal lands from Dongara
	to Green Head. They identified seven geomorphic units within the area.
	The units are Pleistocene Barrier complex, Deflation basins, Parabolic
	dunes, Active parabolic dunes and blowouts, foredunes and beach. These
	geomorphic units are the result of a complex interaction between
	geology, climate, vegetation, soils and coastal processes.

	The geomorphology of the area was mapped by aerial photographic
	interpretation at 1:25 000 scale using 1978 aerial photographs. To
	check the reliability of the aerial photographic interpretation a field
	reconnaissance of the area was conducted by Hesp and Gozzard (1983).
	The main characteristic of each geomorphic unit is outlined below
	(FIGURE 4).

	<h> Pleistocene Barrier Complex </h>

	This geomorphic unit is equivalent to Tamala limestone which outcrops
	extensively to form rocky headlands and pools as well as submarine
	shelf chains and islands. The barrier complex consists of cemented
	aeolian calcarenite (limestone) and is often covered by a veneer of
	Safety Bay Sand.

	<h> Parabolic Dunes </h>
	
	The geological equivalent of the parabolic dunes is the Quindalup dune
	system. The parabolic dune system represents more recent (Holocene)
	activity which has camouflaged the Pleistocene dune ridge complex. They
	are orientated in a north-south direction (parallel to the coast) which
	is the dominant wind direction. Active Parabolic Dune lobes and
	blowouts are at South Bay and north of Green Head. They are usually
	formed during periods of high sand influx and are later cutoff by
	vegetation recolonisation when the sand supply decreases. The active
	parabolic dune lobes continue to advance (approximately 1-9 m/yr) in a
	northern direction.

	<h> Deflation Basins </h>

	These areas are the flat and gently undulating erosion plains which are
	bounded by the active and inactive parabolic dunes.

	<h> Foredune </h>

	This unit may be made up of active and relic beach ridges. The ridges
	are asymmetric and can be vegetated or semi-vegetated. The geological
	equivalent is Safety Bay Sand and in some sections Quindalup Sand.

	<h> Beach </h>

	The beach is the active surf/swash zone and is a highly dynamic process
	area.

<h>2.7	TERRESTRIAL FAUNA </h>

<h>2.7.1	Mammals and Birds </h>

	Chapman et al. (1977) completed a case study of the Cockleshell Gully
	Reserve which is included in the project*theproject area. Chapman and
	Kitchener (1977) found thirteen native mammals and six exotic mammals.
        An annotated list of mammals is included in APPENDIX 1. With the 
        exception of Sminthopsis granulipes all mammal species recorded in this
        survey were previously known to inhabit the west coastal sand heaths 
        between Moore and Murchison Rivers.

	In contrast to the mammalian community the birdlife of the area is rich
	and diverse. There have been a total of 146 species of birds recorded
	from the area.

	The Cockleshell Gully area is relatively undisturbed by clearing or
	mining and therefore it is of considerable importance in maintaining
	large breeding populations of birds. Thus, the area is viewed as "the
	most important portion of the southwest for conserving coastal passerine
	birds" (Dell and Johnstone, 1977).

	The area is very rich in heath-dwelling species. The genus Malurus is
	represented by four species, and the genera Stipiturus, Sericornis,
	Calamanthus and Acanthiza are present. Similarly, the islands of the
	area, especially the Fishermen Islands, are important breeding grounds
	for nine species of sea birds and waders.

</sample>



<sample><id> H17 </id>

<note> 2014 </note>

<source> Journal of Agriculture Western Australia </source>

<h> More lambs from feed and chemical treatments </h>

<bl> By K. P. Croker, Research Officer, Sheep and Wool Branch </bl>

The ovulation rate, or the number of eggs shed per ovulating ewe, represents the
upper limit of the capacity of a flock of ewes to produce lambs. Several methods
can be used to increase ovulation rates and lambing percentages of ewes,
including selection for better breeding, feeding and the use of chemicals.

The potential for improving the reproductive performance of Western Australia's
ewe flocks by the use of different approaches to breeding was discussed by L.G.
Butler and R.P. Lewer in the Journal of Agriculture in 1983.

This article mainly discusses the research conducted by the Department of
Agriculture's Sheep and Wool Branch on the supplementary feeding of ewes with
sweet narrow-leafed lupin seed (Lupinus angustifolius) and the more recent
investigations of the technique of immunisation to change the levels of some of
the sex hormones in ewes. Both methods can increase ovulation rates and
subsequent lambing percentages.

<h> Improved nutrition </h>
Farmers can give ewes more nutritious feed before and at joining to increase
ovulation rates.

<h> Flushing </h>
Ewes can be flushed to improve their lambing performances by placing them on a
high plane of nutrition before the start of joining. This practice has long been
used by farmers.

Many experiments on flushing ewes in this way in Western Australia and elsewhere
have shown that both increasing ewe liveweight, as well as the liveweight at
mating, influence ovulation rate and lambing performance.

Research at Beverley, Western Australia, as early as 1941 showed that more twin
lambs were born to Merino x Border Leicester crossbred ewes grazing a paddock
with oaten stubble and unharvested field peas for seven weeks, starting two weeks
before the entire rams were joined with them in mid December (Table 1).

Although it appears that flushing flocks produces only small gains when the ewes
are in good body condition, there does not seem to be any valid reason for
reducing the liveweight amd condition of ewes before starting to feed them up
again.

The body condition of ewes at joining, which is an assessment of fatness as
distinct from liveweight, also influences lambing performances. Ewes gaining in
body condition have higher ovulation rates. Therefore, ewes should be managed so
that they are in good body condition at the start of joining. Farmers can do this
by adjusting stocking rates to increase the amount of paddock feed available to
ewes.

In Western Australia's major sheep-grazing areas the quantity as well as quality
of paddock feed gradually deteriorates after pastures dry off. Because of these
changes to paddock feed, larger increases in lambing percentages would be
expected from ewes flushed in January and February. By then, ewes often have lost
weight and condition.

However, there are no experimental results indicating that this is a better time
to flush ewes rather than in November and December.

<h> Feeding sweet lupin seed </h>
In the early 1970s research at the University of Western Australia and the
Department of Agriculture showed that feeding ewes sweet narrow-leafed lupin
seed at joining could increase ovulation rates and lambing performances. It was
suggested that feeding lupin seed, which contains about 30 per cent crude 
protein, overcame the low levels of protein in dry pastures thought to be 
responsible for the poor lambing percentages that are common in the 
agricultural area. Apart from containing high levels of protein and energy, 
sweet lupins are a safe supplement to feed to ewes who readily eat the seeds 
once they are familiar with them.

The degree of response in ovulation rate was related to the amount of lupin seed
eaten. More consistent results were obtained with daily supplements of 250 grams
per head or more (Table 2).

These early experiments in the 1970s showed that there was a positive
relationship between ovulation rate and the number of ewes which lambed when
lupins were fed to them during joining. By increasing ovulation rate, more ewes
lambed and more twins were born.

Ewes seem to respond to lupin supplements soon after feeding starts. In an
experiment at Merredin ovulation rate increased eight days after feeding lupins
(Table 3). Independent research at the University of Western Australia showed
that ovulation could be increased after only six days of feeding. Therefore, it
would appear that ovulation rate can be increased without measurable changes in
liveweight because these feeding periods are too short for significant changes in
weight.

The results from the initial experiments also indicated that 2.5-year-old ewes
were not as responsive to lupin supplements as were older ewes. It was
subsequently shown that ovulation in 1.5-year-old ewes was not increased after
feeding either 250 or 500 g of lupins per head per day. Ovulation rates of
2.5-year-old ewes increased only when 500 g of lupins per head per day were fed,
whereas older ewes showed increases in ovulation at both feeding rates (Table
4).

Other research by the University of Western Australia at Northam during the
spring, summer and autumn of 1975-76 showed that when ewes were fed 750 g of
lupins per head per day ovulation rates increased in October, January and
February, but not in December. In contrast, observations by the Department at
Beverley on ewes which received 250 or 500 g of lupins per head per day over
similar periods in 1975-76 and 1976-77 showed no consistent effect of season on
ovulation rates, although there were slight, but not statistically significant,
increases in the ewes fed the bigger amount. These ewes produced more twins.
Perhaps more lupin seed is necessary to obtain consistently large ovulation
responses at the various times of joining.

Results from the Department's experiments between 1972 to 1977 were examined.
They indicated that ovulation rates and lambing performances of ewes 3.5 years
and older could be economically increased by feeding the equivalent of 250 g of
lupins per head per day to `teased' ewes for 14 days before the entire rams were
joined with them and until day 17 of joining.

<h> On-farm trials </h>
The potential application of this method was examined on 50 farms and with 22
800 mature ewes in the agricultural area between 1977 and 1982. Three series of
trials compared the lambing performances of unsupplemented flocks with those fed
lupins.

In the first series, the supplemented ewes received 250 g of lupins per head per
day. Because these trials showed a large variation in responses to lupin
supplements, a second series was conducted in which nearly all trials had an
additional group which received a daily supplement of 500 g of lupins per head.
In the last series of trials, ewes on properties which had marked 60 per cent or
fewer lambs during the preceding five years were fed lupins at 250 g per head per
day to determine whether worthwhile increases in lambing percentages were
obtained.

The overall results from these on-farms studies did not show any significant
increase in the lambing performances of the supplemented ewes. As was found at
Beverley, there was no difference in response between the various times of
joining. However, there was a large variation between farms in the differences
between the unsupplemented and supplemented ewes in the percentage of lambs
born, ranging from 14 per cent fewer lambs born to the supplemented ewes in one
trial to 21 per cent more lambs born to these ewes. Increasing the supplementary
feeding rate to 500 g per head per day did not overcome the variability in the
lambing response.

In the third series of trials where the properties were selected on the basis of
previous poor lambing performances, the unsupplemented ewes had good lambing
figures (93 per cent lambs born). Perhaps, as a result, this is the reason that
supplementation did not significantly increase the percentage of lambs born.

The results from the on-farm trials may be associated with a potential clover
disease problem. In series 1 and 2 trials, the best results were obtained from
the Bunbury area where it had been previously shown that sub-clinical clover
disease depressed lambing performances of ewes. The results obtained from this
area and, for comparison, those from Merredin, a non-clover pasture area, are
shown in Table 5.

On the properties in the Bunbury area less than 80 per cent of ewes lambed
whereas in the Merredin area between 88 and 94 per cent of ewes lambed. However,
the apparent association of large responses to lupin supplements where
subterranean clover pastures may depress lambing percentages has not been
examined experimentally, so that confirmation is still required.

<h> A place for lupins? </h>
Although the Department of Agriculture has conducted many experiments between
1972 and 1982 on feeding sweet lupin seed to ewes to increase ovulation rates
and lambing percentages, it is still not possible to recommend that lupins be
used to improve lambing performances on all farms. The major problem is
determining which ewe flocks can be supplemented successfully and what causes
the tremendous variability in the lambing performances of flocks after
supplementation. This is the basis of our search for the components of lupins
which affect ovulation rates, as discussed in `Ovulation rate of ewes - role of
energy and protein' on page 36.

<h> Chemicals </h>
A range of pharmaceutical products is available which can influence the
reproductive efficiency of sheep. Of relevance here are those which can increase
ovulation rates and so provide an opportunity to improve the lambing percentages
of flocks.

<h> PMSG </h>
Pregnant mare serum gonadotrophin (PMSG) can be used to stimulate an ewe's
ovaries directly. According to the dosage given, it can produce moderate or very
high ovulation rates.

There are several problems with the use of PMSG. It must be used either in
conjunction with techniques which synchronise oestrous or with the careful
monitoring of natural oestrous. It must be injected on the 12th to 14th day of
the oestrous cycle. The hormone is expensive and adds considerably to the cost
of production. Also the response to it are highly variable, both within and
between ewes.

PMSG can only be obtained on a veterinarian's prescription.

<h> Immunisation against ovarian hormones </h>
After the discovery in the early 1970s that ovulation rates of ewes were
increased when they were immunised against the sex hormones oestrone (a female
hormone) and androstenedione (a male hormone), CSIRO developed a new method of
producing more twins from ewes. The ewes are injected with a hormone-protein
compound that will stimulate antibody production. The antibodies neutralise some
of the naturally circulating sex hormones, which results in the release of two
eggs instead of one in some ewes.

An important part of the development of this technique has been to find what
level of antibody production is needed to stimulate above-normal lambing
performances without the harmful side-effect of having triplets or quadruplets.

The first experiments with the immunising compounds were conducted by CSIRO at
Armidale, New South Wales, in 1977-78 and led to significant increases in
ovulation.

Evaluation of the compounds started in Western Australia in 1980 because the
strain of Merino and the field environment here differ from those examined by
CSIRO.

The initial experiments were conducted on the Department's Wongan Hills Research
Station with Merino ewes which were 2.5-years-old when first immunised. The
results are shown in the figures. During these investigations, CSIRO's
scientists were `tailoring' the compounds (immunogens) and procedures to give
the right biological response. Hence, there were slight differences between
experiments. However, in this State injections of the immunogens increased
ovulation rates and resulted in more lambs being born.

In late 1983 an anti-androstenedione compound which had been developed under an
agreement between CSIRO and Glaxo Australia Pty Ltd was released commercially as
Fecundin &reg;. Subsequently, the Department began to evaluate the responses to
immunisation with Fecundin &reg; of Merino and crossbred ewes on commercial
properties.

<h> On-farm trials </h>
In 1984 crossbred ewes on properties at Moora and Rosa Glen and Merino ewes on
properties at Darkan, Jingalup and Chowerup were treated.

At Moora the ovulation rate of the untreated ewes was 1.31 whereas it was
increased to 1.77 in the immunised ewes, but only 9 per cent more lambs were
marked in the immunised ewes.

</sample>

                    



<sample><id> H18 </id>

<note> 2011 words </note>

<source> The Law Reform Commission Report No 3 - The Recognition of Aboriginal Customery  Laws </source>

<h>17.  Aboriginal customary laws and the criminal justice system </h>

  It is, no doubt, a question of high legislative policy whether
  tribal aboriginals, who are unable to understand the concepts
  of the ordinary law, ought to be tried under that law.
  <misc> Ngatayi v R (1980) 30 ALR 27, 34 (Gibbs, Mason, Wilson JJ) </misc>

  The existence of two systems of law side by side, the
  prevailing one and aboriginal customary law, with their very
  different attitudes to guilt and responsibility, creates
  serious problems and the question of how far our laws should
  apply to aboriginals and how far their law should be allowed
  to apply to them is controversial.
  <misc> id, 36-7 (Murphy J) </misc>

393. The Commission's Terms of Reference. The Terms of
Reference refer to the `diffi+culties that have at times
emerged in the application of the existing criminal justice
sys+tem to members of the Aboriginal race', and require the
Commission to investigate, among other things:

  a) whether, and in what manner, existing courts dealing with
  criminal charges against Abor+igines should be empowered to
  apply Aboriginal customary law and practices in the trial and
  punishment of Aborigines; and
  (b) to what extent Aboriginal communities should have the power
  to apply their customary law and practices in the punishment
  and rehabilitation of Aborigines.

Although the Reference is not restricted to the recognition of
Aboriginal customary laws in the criminal law, a particular
concern of the Reference is the difficulties often experi+enced
by Aborigines dealt with by the Australian criminal justice
system (and, equally, by the criminal justice system in dealing
with those Aborigines). These questions are consid+ered in this
part of the Report. In this chapter it is proposed to set out
the basic factual and comparative background, and to outline
the various issues which arise in considering the recognition
of Aboriginal customary laws in the trial and sentencing of
Aborigines. Chapter 18 will consider the problems arising with
the substantive criminal law in its ap+plication to Aboriginal
defendants, including the question whether a new defence should
be recognised based on Aboriginal customary laws. Chapter 19
discusses the converse question, whether Aboriginal customary
laws should themselves be imported into the general legal
system in some way, so as to be a basis for criminal liability
and punish+ment under the general law. Chapter 20 discusses
procedural as distinct from substantive forms of recognition
of Aboriginal customary laws in this area. Finally, Chapter 21
dis+cusses in more detail questions of the sentencing of
Aborigines convicted of offences, and in particular the
application of `customary law and practices' in their
punishment and re+habilitation.

<h> The Statistical Background </h>

394. The Disproportionate Impact of the Criminal Justice
System. That Aborigines are subject to the general criminal law
has long been established. Great difficulties have sometimes
been experienced in the trial of traditional Aborigines, whose
comprehension not only of the forms and procedures of their
trial but also of the substance of the charge is often slight
or even non-existent. But, despite difficulties in particular
cases, the crimi+nal law has been applied to Aborigines in all
its aspects. The results of its application are now so well
known as to be notorious. Aborigines are grossly over-
represented in Aus+tralian criminal statistics, both in terms
of conviction rates and rates of imprisonment. In her
`pioneering study', Dr Eggleston pointed out that in Western
Australia in 1965, Abor+igines, who constituted 2.5% of the
State's population, were convicted of 11% of offences and made
up 24% of the prison population. In South Australia in the same
year, Abor+igines (0.7% of the population) accounted for 14%
of the admissions to prison. This over-representation, she
found, was not only the result of different patterns of
criminality, but of differences in arrest, prosecution and
sentencing practices. Although the distribution of offences has
changed since the 1960s, the overall situation remains similar.
National Prison Census figures for 1984 indicate that
Aborigines, while less than 2% of the Austral+ian population,
comprise approximately 10.5% of the prison population. The rate
of im+prisonment of Aborigines is over 16 times that of non-
Aborigines. On a State by State basis the rates are as follows:

<note> table omitted </note>

Indeed, it is possible that these figures understate the real
situation, at least with respect to some classes of offence.
In a study of violent crime on Queensland Aboriginal reserves,
Dr Paul Wilson found an annual homicide rate (for the 17
communities studied) of 39.6 per 100 000, compared with a rate
for Queensland of 3.28 and for all Australia of 4.0. The rate
of serious assault on these reserves was also far greater than
the Queensland rate.

  Assault is far more likely than murder to be ignored by white
  police, to go unreported, or to be dealt with informally by
  Aboriginal police on reserves. But even with assault we find
  the same bleak picture emerging from the statistics. The rate
  for serious assault charges on reserves is 226.05 per 100 000
  compared with a Queensland figure of 43.85. So, although the
  reported Ab+original rate is five times greater than for that
  State as a whole, the enormous `hidden' assault rate - crimes
  not reported - is probably 10 to 15 times the State or
  national figure.

395. The Position with Minor Offences. The exorbitant crime and
imprisonment rates recorded in these studies are not confined
to serious or violent crimes. At least in recent times, a high
proportion of Aboriginal offences has been of a minor,
repetitive, some+times even trivial character. The New South
Wales Anti-Discrimination Board in a study of street offences
by Aborigines found that:

  in 10 NSW towns with high Aboriginal populations, Aborigines
  charged with minor offences in public places greatly outnumber
  non-Aborigines. The behaviour resulting in the charges was in
  the main of a trivial nature, the majority of offences
  involving the use of unseemly words. Penalties, too, have a
  more severe impact on Aboriginal people. An appreciable num+ber
  of those convicted and fined in the 10 towns in this study went
  to jail rather than pay the fine, even though jail is not a
  punishment option available under the Offences in Public Places
  Act.

In South Australia between 1 January 1983 - 30 June 1983, 34%
of all persons convicted of `drunkenness', `minor street
offences' and `offences against order' were Aboriginal. In
country areas a similar pattern emerges to that in NSW:

  A study of court records ... show that courts servicing
  communities with a substantial Abor+iginal population ... have
  markedly higher rates of imprisonment for vagrancy offences
  and fines and imprisonment for public drunkenness offenders
  than other courts. An Aboriginal de+fendant charged with
  of+fensive behaviour before the country courts in this State
  is five times more likely to receive a prison sentence and six
  times more likely to be refused bail than non-Aboriginals.

The National Prison Census of 1984 indicates that 14.3% of all
persons in prison for `of+fensive behaviour' offences are
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. Aborigines and Torres
Strait Islanders are similarly
disproportionately*disproprotionately represented for other
`good order' offences (26.5% of all prisoners) and for justice
procedure offences eg breach of bond (17.3%). Changes in the
law aimed at remedying this situation - such as the
decriminalisation of intoxication or reform of the law relating
to street offences - have often not produced the desired
result. Such changes do not necessarily lead to a reduc+tion
in the level of contact by Aborigines with the criminal justice
system, and especially with the police.

396. Aboriginal Juvenile Offenders. The statistics for juvenile
offenders present a similar picture. For example, in the
Northern Territory in 1983-4, 400 of the 894 appearances
(44.7%) by juvenile defendants in criminal cases were made by
Aborigines; in Western Australia in the same year the figure
was 1173 of 8266, (14.2%)." As the Director of the Office of
Crime Statistics in South Australia has pointed out, such
figures:

  consistently ... show that young Aboriginal people suspected
  of offending are:
  &bullet; more likely to be arrested than summonsed;
  &bullet; more likely to be referred to courts rather than to aid
  panels (during the first half of 1982, 64% of young Aboriginal
  defendants went to court, compared to only 36% of other
  defend+ants - penalties imposed by aid panels generally are
  far less severe than courts);
  &bullet; more likely to have been remanded in custody.

397. What do the Statistics Mean? Commenting on earlier but
similar Aboriginal im+prisonment rates the then Director of the
Australian Institute of Criminology said:

  These are dramatic rates of imprisonment by any standards and
  for any community. Just to quote them is to question their
  justification. You have to believe either that Aboriginals are
  the most criminal of minorities in the world or that there is
  something inherently wrong with a system which uses
  imprisonment so liberally.

The problems reflected by these statistics cannot be attributed
to any one cause, whether this is actual offending rates, the
problematic definition of offences in some cases, or
dis+criminatory policing. The situation - or rather, the range
of situations - which underly the statistics is undoubtedly
the product of a variety of factors. But understanding of these
remains limited, and the need for careful assessment of the
present position, as well as for appropriate action, is
obvious. Where the situation described in these studies and
reports results from discriminatory policing, steps should be
taken to prevent such dis+crimination in future. To the extent
that it results from insensitive application of the law, the
law or its administration should be appropriately reformed. To
the extent that it re+sults from poverty, social and educational
deprivation and poor standards of health (en+gendering
attitudes of apathy, boredom or despair) these should be
confronted and if possible remedied. To the extent that it
results from alcohol or petrol sniffing, the pro+vision of
appropriate rehabilitation and support services should be
encouraged. All this is well enough known and ought to be
generally accepted. In many areas some steps have been or are
being taken, by or in collaboration with Aboriginal agencies
and organisa+tions, in the directions suggested above. But the
question remains: what is the relevance of these statistics for
this Reference? To what extent are they the product of non-
recognition of Aboriginal customary laws? Do they reflect
problems experienced by all Aborigines, or only certain groups?
Are the problems a product of conflict between the general law
and Aboriginal customary laws, and if so, to what extent can
they be re+solved through their recognition?
 
398. Large Heterogeneous Communities. Many Aborigines, including
many traditionally oriented Aborigines, now live in much larger
groups than was usual in pre-contact times. Many of these
groups comprise people from different language groups and
localities, with consequent dislocation and disharmony. The
survey of Queensland re+serves conducted by Wilson:

  found two distinct clusters of reserves. One cluster had a very
  high rate of violence and the other was relatively low,
  although the latter rate was high by white standards. Examples
  of communities where violence rates were high included Palm
  Island, Weipa South and Yar+rabah, where the average rate of
  violence was 7.07 per 1000 people. Those in the low-violence
  group (with a violence rating of 2.31 per 1000) include
  Lockhart, Doomadgee and Aurukun. High violence reserves were
  marked by a number of characteristics: alcohol was legally
  avail+able; they had only low to medium levels of traditional
  culture; they had relatively high popu+lations; most
  importantly, they were reserves that had received displaced
  Aborigines from other areas. Palm Island was originally
  established as a penal settlement. Weipa South had taken in
  people forcibly removed by police from their tribal lands at
  Mapoon, as well as others from Aurukun and Edward River.
  Yarrabah has people from a number of tribes. Re+serves with a
  lower rating had nearly the reverse pattern: they were
  communities in which al+cohol was not legally available; where
  relatively high levels of traditional culture survived; they
  had low populations; they were generally isolated from white
  influence; they were not re+ceivers of people forced from their
  traditional areas. These trends in violence and destruction on
  Aboriginal reserves point to explanations which are familiar
  to observers of other societies. 

</sample>



<sample><id> H19 </id>

<note> 2023 words </note>

<source> The Law Reform Commission Report No 30 - Domestic Violence </source>

<h> AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY </h>

<h> Crimes (Domestic Violence) Ordinance 1986 </h>

<h> An Ordinance relating to domestic violence </h>

<h> PART I - PRELIMINARY </h>

  1. This Ordinance may be cited as the Crimes (Domestic
Violence) Ordinance 1986.

<h> Commencement </h>
2. This Ordinance shall come into operation on a day to be
fixed by the Minister by notice published in the Gazette.

<h> Interpretation </h>
3. In this Ordinance, unless the contrary intention appears -
"child", in relation to a person, includes -

  (a) an adopted child of the person;
  (b) a step-child of the person;
  (c) an ex-nuptial child of the person; and
  (d) a child of the person or of the spouse or de facto spouse
      of the person, being a child who is or was, at the relevant
      time, ordi+narily a member of the household of the person and
      the spouse or de facto spouse of the person and treated by them
      as a child of their family;

"the Court" means the Court of Petty Sessions;

"de facto spouse", in relation to a person, means a person of
  the oppo+site sex to the first-mentioned person who is living
  with the first-mentioned person as that person's husband or
  wife although not le+gally married to the first-mentioned
  person;

"member of the family", in relation to a person, means a
  spouse, de fac+to spouse, child or parent of the person;

"parent", in relation to a person who is -
  (a) an adopted child - means the adoptive parent of the child;
  (b) a step-child - includes the step-parent of the person;
  (c) an ex-nuptial child - includes the natural father of the
      person;
  (d) a child as mentioned in paragraph (d) of the definition of
      "child" - includes the person, and the spouse of the de facto
      spouse of the person, mentioned in that paragraph;
"police officer" means a member of Australian Federal Police;
"protection order" means an order made under Part II.

<h> Prescribed offences </h>
4. A reference in this Ordinance to a prescribed offence is a
reference to the following offences -

  (a) murder;
  (b) manslaughter;
  (c) an offence, whether committed in the Territory or
      elsewhere, of a kind to which section 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 
      33A, 35, 37, 38, 39, 41, 46, 47, 54, 58, 59, 83, 90A, 92A to 92D
      (inclusive), 92F, 92H, 92J, 92M, 493, 494 or 546A of the Crimes
      Act, 1900 of the State of New South Wales in its application
      in the Territory applies or of a like kind;
  (d) an attempt to commit an offence of a kind referred to in
      para+graphs (a) to (c) (inclusive),
being an offence committed or attempted to be committed by a
person against the spouse or a former spouse, or the de facto
spouse or a for+mer de facto spouse, of the person.

<h> PART II - PROTECTION ORDERS </h>

<h> Protection orders </h>
5. (1) The Court, if it is satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that a person has engaged in conduct (whether in
the Territory or not) that -

  (a) constitutes a prescribed offence committed against the
      person's spouse or de facto spouse; or
  (b) may reasonably be regarded as harassment of the person's
      spouse or de facto spouse, 
and is likely to engage again in such conduct, may make an order 
restraining the person from engaging in that conduct or in similar 
con+duct.

  (2) The Court, if it is satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that a person has engaged in conduct (whether in
the Territory or not) that -
  (a) constitutes a prescribed offence committed against a former
      spouse, or a former de facto spouse, of the person; or
  (b) may reasonably be regarded as harassment of a former
      spouse, or a former de facto spouse, of the person,
and is likely to engage again in such conduct, may make an
order restraining the person from engaging in that conduct or
in similar con+duct.
  (3) On an application for a protection order, the Court may,
if it considers that it is desirable to do so, before
considering the applica+tion, make an interim protection order.
  (4) The Court may, on application by the applicant or the
respon+dent, vary or revoke the protection order.

<h> Applications for protection order </h>

  6. (1) An application for a protection order under sub-section
5(1) may be made by the spouse or the de facto spouse of the
person against whom the order is sought.

  (2) An application for a protection order under sub-section
5(2) may be made by the former spouse, or the former de facto
spouse, con+cerned.

  (3) A police officer may apply for a protection order.

  (4) With the leave of the Court, a person other than a person
men+tioned in sub-section (1), (2) or (3) may apply for a
protection order as agent for the applicant.

  (5) In relation to proceedings on an application made as
mentioned in sub-section (3) or (4), a reference in this Part
to the applicant is a ref+erence to the person against whom the
offence concerned was commit+ted, or who was harassed.

  (6) The person against whom the order is sought shall be the
respon+dent to the application.

  (7) Where an application for a protection order has been served
on a person, section 199 of the Court of Petty Sessions
Ordinance 1930 ap+plies in relation to the person as it applies
in relation to a defendant as mentioned in that section.

<h> Affidavit evidence </h>
7. (1) Evidence on an application for a protection order may
be given on affidavit.
  (2) It is not necessary to call a person who made such an
affidavit to give evidence unless a party to the proceeding,
or the Court, so requires.

<h> Form of orders </h>
8. (1) Subject to this Ordinance, a protection order may
include pro+visions restraining a person -

  (a) from being in premises in which the applicant for the
      protection order resides;
  (b) from being in premises that are the place of work of the
      appli+cant for the protection order;
  (c) from being in a specified locality, being a locality in
      which premises as mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) are
      situated;
  (d) from approaching within a specified distance of the
      applicant for the protection order; and
  (e) if the person continues to reside with the applicant for
      the pro+tection order - from entering or remaining in the place
      of resi+dence while intoxicated.

  (2) A protection order that includes provision as mentioned in
para+graph (1)(a) may also include provision -

  (a) restraining the respondent from taking possession of
      personal property of either the applicant or the respondent,
      being prop+erty that is reasonably needed by a member of the
      respondent's family; or
  (b) directing the respondent to give possession of such of that
      prop+erty as is specified in the order to a specified member
      of the re+spondent's family.

<h> Matters to be taken into account </h>
9. (1) In determining an application for a protection order,
the mat+ters that the Court shall take into account include -

  (a) the need to ensure that persons are protected from violence
      and harassment;
  (b) if the members of the respondent's family include a child
      who has not attained the age of 18 years - the welfare of the
      child;
  (c) the accommodation needs of the members of that family; and
  (d) the hardship that will be caused to the respondent or to
      any other person if the order is made.

  (2) In determining whether to make an order that includes
provision of the kind mentioned in sub-section 8(2), the Court
shall also take into account the property, income and financial
resources, and the financial obligations, of the applicant and
the respondent.

<h> Orders on applications by police, &c. </h>
10. A protection order shall not be made on an application made
as mentioned in sub-section 6(3) or (4) unless the applicant
consents to the making of the order.

<h> Notice to respondents </h>
11. A protection order shall not be made unless -

  (a) the respondent has had actual notice of the application for
      that order; or
  (b) by reason of circumstances of seriousness or urgency, it
      is prop+er to make the order without notice to the respondent.

<h> Ouster orders </h>
12. (1) Where an agreement (including a mortgage or a lease of
premises) provides that, if the respondent ceases to reside in
his or her place of residence, a person may do a particular
thing prejudicial to the interests of the respondent or a
member of the respondent's family, the person is not entitled
to do that thing if the respondent ceases to reside in the
place of residence, in compliance with a protection order.

  (2) Where the respondent is the lessee, or a lessee, of his or
her place of residence, the Court may, on making a protection
order that, or that includes provision that, would have the
effect of restraining the respon+dent from entering or
remaining in the place of residence, make an or+der -

  (a) varying the lease by substituting for the lessee or lessees
      a mem+ber of the respondent's family; and
  (b) directing that any payments made under the lease be treated
      as having been made by that member.

  (3) Subject to sub-section(4), such an order has effect
according to its tenor.

  (4) Where the lease has been registered under the Real Property
Ordi+nance 1925, such an order does not have effect until a
memorial of the variation of the lease is registered under that
Ordinance.

  (5) Sub-section (2) does not apply in relation to a Crown lease
within the meaning of the Real Property Ordinance 1925.
  (6) This section applies notwithstanding section 10 of the
Court of Petty Sessions (Civil Jurisdiction) Ordinance 1982.

<h> Operation of protection orders </h>
13. (1) A provision of a protection order is not applicable in
relation to a person unless the person has actual notice of the
provision.

  (2) The notice may have been given orally, but in the case of
a pro+vision that would have the effect of restraining the
respondent from en+tering or remaining in his or her place of
residence, that shall have been given in writing.

<h> Breach of protection order </h>
14. (1) A person shall not contravene or fail to comply with
a pro+vision of a protection order that is applicable to the
person. 
Penalty:

  (2) A person may, in accordance with law, arrest a person for
an of+fence against sub-section (1).

  (3) Where a prosecution for an offence against sub-section (I)
is in+stituted by summons, the summons shall require the person
to appear to answer the information at a time not later than
72 hours after the time at which the summons is issued.

  (4) Service of the summons shall be effected at least 24 hours
before the time appointed in the summons for the hearing of the
information.

  (5) Sub-sections (3) and (4) have effect notwithstanding
sections 38 and 41 of the Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance
1930.

<h> Restriction on publication of court proceedings </h>
15. (1) A person shall not publish in a newspaper or periodical
pub+lication or by radio broadcast or television, or otherwise
disseminate to the public or to a section of the public or to
a section of the public by any means, the identity of a party
to proceedings in connection with a protection order, or
information from which the identity of such a party may readily
be ascertained.
Penalty:

  (2) Sub-section (1) does not prevent a publication in
circumstances that, or is of a kind that, were the proceedings
proceedings under the Family Law Act 1975 would not constitute
a contravention of section 12 of that Act.

  (3) Proceedings for an offence against this section shall not
be com+menced except by, or with the consent in writing of, the
Attorney-General or the Director of Public Prosecutions, or a
person authorised by either of those persons in that behalf.

<h> PART III - MISCELLANEOUS </h>

<h> Bail </h>
16. (1) Where a person or body has, under a law of the
Territory, power to grant bail to a person (in this section
called the "accused") in respect of a prescribed offence, the
matters that the person or body shall take into account in
determining whether to grant bail to the accused and the
conditions on which bail is to be granted include -

</sample>



<sample><id> H20 </id>

<note> 2060 words </note>

<source> Veterans Entitlements Act 1986 with Regulations index </source>

<h> Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986 </h>

<h> No. 27 of 1986 </h>

<misc> An Act to provide for the payment of pensions and other benefits to, and
to provide medical and other treatment for, veterans and certain other persons,
and for other purposes </misc>
BE IT ENACTED by the Queen, and the Senate and the House of Representatives
of the Commonwealth of Australia, as follows:

 	<h> PART 1 - PRELIMINARY </h>

<h> SECTION 1   SHORT TITLE </h>

1  This Act may be cited as the Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986.

<h> SECTION 2   COMMENCEMENT </h>

2  This Act shall come into operation on a date to be fixed by Proclamation.

[CCH Note: Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986 proclaimed to commence on 22
May 1986 - Commonwealth Gazette No. S225, 20 May 1986.]

SECTION 3   REPEAL

3(1)  [Acts repealed]  The Acts specified in Parts I, II, III, IV and V
of Schedule 1 are repealed.

3(2)  [Acts amended]  The Acts specified in column 1 of Part VI of Schedule
1 are amended as set out in columns 2 and 3 of that Schedule.

<h> SECTION 4   EXTENSION OF ACT TO EXTERNAL TERRITORIES  </h>

4  This Act extends to the external Territories.

<h> SECTION 5   INTERPRETATION </h>

5(1)  [Definitions]  In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears-
      
      "acting commissioner" means a person who is acting as a commissioner
      in pursuance of an appointment under section 191;

      "Acting Deputy President" means a commissioner or acting commissioner
      who is acting as Deputy President in pursuance of an appointment under
      section 192;

      "Acting President" means a commissioner or acting commissioner who
      is acting as President in pursuance of an appointment under section
      192 or 193;

      "allied country" means any country (not being Australia or a Commonwealth
      country) - 
      
      (a)  that was, at the relevant time, at war with the enemy; or

      (b)  the forces or which were, at the relevant time, engaged in an
	   operational area against forces against which the forces of the
	   Commonwealth were engaged in that area,

      and includes -

      (c)  a state, province or other territory that is one of 2 or more
	   territories that together form, or formed at the relevant time,
	   a discrete part of such a country; and

      (d)  a place that is, or was at the relevant time, a territory,
           dependency or colony (however described) of such a country;

      "approved Guide to the Assessment of Rates of Veterans' Pensions"
      means -

      (a)  the document, prepared by the Commission in accordance with section
	   29 under the title "Guide to the Assessment of Rates of Veterans'
	   Pensions", that has been approved by the Minister and is for
	   the time being in force; or

      (b)  if an instrument varying that document has been approved by the
	   Minister, that document as so varied;

      "approved Treatment Principles" means -

      (a)  the document, prepared by the Commission in accordance with section
	   90 under the title "Treatment Principles", that has been approved
	   by the Minister and is for the time being in force; or

      (b)  if an instrument varying that document has been approved by the
	   Minister, that document as so varied;

      "Board" means the Veterans' Review Board continued in existence by
      section 134 of this Act;

      "child" means -

      (a)  a person who has not attained the age of 16 years; or

      (b)  a person who -

          (i) has attained the age of 16 years but has not attained the
	      age of 25 years;

         (ii) is undertaking full-time education at a school, college or
              university; and

        (iii) is not in receipt of a pension under Part III or IV, a benefit
	      under Part IVAAA or VII or a rehabilitation allowance under
	      Part VIII of the Social Security Act 1947 or an allowance
	      under section 9 of the Tuberculosis Act 1948;

      "Commission" means the Repatriation Commission continued in existence
      by section 179 of this Act;

      "commissioner" means a person holding an office of commissioner in
      pursuance of an appointment under section 182;

      "Commonwealth country" means a country (other than Australia) that
      is, or was at the relevant time, a part of the Dominions of the Crown,
      and includes -
      
       (a) a state, province or other territory that is one of 2 or more
	   territories that together form, or formed at the relevant time,
	   a discrete part of such a country; and

       (b) a place that is, or was at the relevant time, a territory,
	   dependency or colony (however described) of a part of such a
	   country;

      "continuous full-time service" means - 

       (a) in relation to a member of the Defence Force -

          (i) service in the Naval Forces of the Commonwealth of the kind
	      known as continuous full-time naval service;

	 (ii) service in the Military Forces of the Commonwealth of the
	      kind known as continuous full-time military service; or
        
        (iii) service in the Air Force of the Commonwealth of the kind known
	      as continuous full-time air force service; or

       (b) in relation to a member of the naval, military or air forces
	   of a Commonwealth country or an allied country - service in those
	   forces of a kind similar to a kind or service referred to in
	   sub-paragraph (a)(i), (ii) or (iii);

      "decision" includes a determination and an assessment;

      "Deputy President" means the Deputy President of the Commission;

      "disease" includes any physical or mental ailment, disorder, defect
      or morbid condition, whether of sudden onset or gradual development,
      and the recurrence of such an ailment, disorder, defect or morbid
      condition, but does not include the aggravation of such an ailment,
      disorder, defect or morbid condition;

      "enemy" means -

       (a) in relation to World War 1 or World War 2 - the naval, military
	   or air forces, or any part of the naval, military or air forces,
	   of a State at war with the Crown during that war; and

       (b) in relation to service in, or a period of hostilities in respect
	   of, an operational area - the naval, military or air forces against
	   which the Naval, Military or Air Forces of the Commonwealth were
	   engaged in that operational area,

      and includes persons assisting any of those forces;

      "injury" means any physical or mental injury, and includes the recurrence
      of any physical or mental injury, but does not include a disease or
      the aggravation of a physical or mental injury;

      "member of the Defence Force" includes a person appointed for continuous
      full-time service with a unit of the Defence Force;

      "member of the Interim Forces" means a person who, on or after 1 July
      1947 and before 1 July 1949 - 

       (a) enlisted or re-engaged in, or was appointed or re-appointed to,
	   the Defence Force for continuous full-time service for a term
	   not exceeding 2 years; or

       (b) was appointed for continuous full-time service with a unit of
	   the Defence Force for a term not exceeding 2 years;

      "operational area" means an area described in column 1 of Schedule
      2;

      "organization representing veterans" means -

       (a) an organization -

          (i) the members of which include veterans throughout the
	      Commonwealth; and

         (ii) the objects of which include the object of representing veterans
	      throughout the Commonwealth; or

       (b) an organization -

          (i) the members of which include persons throughout the Commonwealth
	      who are in receipt of, or are eligible to receive, pensions
	      under Part II as dependants of veterans; and

         (ii) the objects of which include the object of representing persons
	      referred to in sub-paragraph (i) throughout the Commonwealth;

      "port" includes airport;

      "President" means the President of the Commission;

      "remunerative work" includes any remunerative activity;

      "Secretary" means the Secretary to the Department;

      "special mission" means a mission that, in the opinion of the Commission,
      was of assistance to the Commonwealth in the prosecution of a war
      to which this Act applies;

      "unit of the Defence Force" means a body, contingent or detachment
      of the Defence Force;

      "veteran" means -

       (a) a person (including a deceased person) who is, by virtue of section
	   7, to be taken to have rendered eligible war service; or

       (b) a person (including a deceased person) in respect of whom a pension
	   is, or pensions are, payable in pursuance of sub-section 13(6);

      "war to which this Act applies" means World War 1 or World War 2;

      "World War 1" means the war that commenced on 4 August 1914, and includes
      any other war in which the Crown became engaged after that date and
      before 11 November 1918;

      "World War 2" means the war that commenced on 3 September 1939, and
      includes any other war in which the Crown became engaged after that
      date and before 3 September 1945.

5(2)  [Person deemed to be undertaking full-time education]  Where a person
who has attained the age of 16 years would, if the person lodged a claim
for, and were qualified to receive, an unemployment benefit under Part VII
of the Social Security Act 1947, be prevented, by reason of section 120A
of that Act, from being paid that benefit for a period immediately following
his or her ceasing to undertake full-time education at a school, college
or university, the person shall be taken, for the purpose of paragraph (b)
of the definition of "child" in sub-section (1), to continue, during that
period, to undertake full-time education at a school, college or university.

5(3)  [Time when various wars ended]  For the purposes of this Act - 

  (a) World War 1 shall be deemed to have ended on 1 September 1921, being
      the date fixed by Proclamation under section 2 of the Termination
      of the Present War (Definition) Act 1919;

  (b) World War 2 shall be deemed to have ended on 28 April 1952, being
      the date on which the Treaty of Peace with Japan came into force;
      and

  (c) an operational area described in column 1 of Schedule 2 shall be deemed
      to have been an operational area during the period specified in column
      2 of that Schedule opposite to the description of the area in column
      1.

5(4)  [Reference to member of unit of Defence Force]  In this Act, unless
the contrary intention appears, a reference to a member of a unit of the
Defence Force shall be read as a reference to a member of the Defence Force
or other person who is a member of the unit, attached to the unit or appointed
for continuous full-time service with the unit.

5(5)  [Resident of Papua New Guinea deemed resident of Australia]  For the
purposes of this Act, a person (not being a person who was an indigenous
inhabitant of the Territory of Papua or the Territory of New Guinea) who
was residing in Papua New Guinea immediately before it became an independent
sovereign State, shall, until the person ceased or ceases so to reside,
be deemed to be a resident of Australia.

5(6)  [Reference to eligible civilian]  In this Act, unless the contrary
intention appears, a reference to an elegible civilian who was killed, or
was detained by the enemy, during World War 2, shall be read as a reference
to a person who, at the time the person was killed, or commenced to be so
detained, as the case may be, was -

 (a) a British subject; and

 (b) a resident, but not an indigenous inhabitant, of the Territory of Papua
     or the Territory of New Guinea,

other than such a person who was, at that time -

 (c) rendering service as a member of the Defence Force; or

 (d) employed by the Commonwealth on a special mission outside Australia.

5(7)  [Temporary absence of de facto spouse]  Where a man and a woman have
been living together as husband and wife on a bona fide domestic basis although
not legally married to each other, they shall be treated for the purposes
of this Act, as so living together during any temporary absence of one of
those persons or during an absence of one of those persons resulting from
illness or infirmity, if the Commission is of the opinion that they would,
but for the absence, have been so living together during the period of that
absence.

5(8) [Member of Army Medical Corps Nursing Service] For the purposes of this Act, a member of the Army Medical Corps Nursing Service who rendered service, either within or outside Australia during World War I, as such a member in accordance with an acceptance or appointment by the Director-General of Medical Services for service outside Australia shall be deemed, while the member rendered that service, to have been serving as a member of the Defence Force. 

</sample>



<sample><id> H21 </id>

<note> 2008 words </note>

<source> Department of Foreign Affairs Annual Report 1984-85. Senate. 19 February, 1986 </source>

Senator SANDERS (Tasmania) (5.11 ) - I move:
     That the Senate take note of the paper.

I note that on page 1 of the annual report for the Department
of Foreign Affairs it says:

     The Department of Foreign Affairs is concerned with
foreign policy advice implementation ...

The report goes on to describe this in detail. I point out that
either the Department is failing in its function or perhaps the
Government is simply not listening to its advice. In fact, the
Government seems to be unaware of much of what is going on in
the world. I refer honourable senators to a question I asked
yesterday in the Senate regarding the policy of the United
States of America, the avowed policy of Admiral James Watkins
who, in the proceedings of the United States Naval Institute,
said that the United States policy was to destroy Soviet
nuclear missile sub+marines at the outset of a conventional
war. I asked a question about the Government's aware+ness of
this policy and its significance, particu+larly to North West
Cape, which, of course, would give the first strike orders. The
Minister representing the Minister for Defence, Senator Gareth
Evans, said:

     However, it appears that this is not a definite agreed
policy but rather the canvassing of one among many
possibilities open to the United States of America in the event
of a conventional conflict with the USSR. Cer+tainly, the
Australian Government -

this is the important part -

is well aware of these and other developments, actual and
possible, in the United States strategic doctrine. To the
extent that the proposal has been canvassed in the way that it
has been by Admiral Watkins, it would be fair to say, from an
Australian defence analysis point of view, that the wisdom of
such a strategy appears to us to be questionable. To attack
Soviet strategic nuclear submarines during a major conventional
conflict would appear to increase further what would already
be a high risk of escalation to nuclear war

That I agree with. It turns out, in spite of that definitive
statement by the honourable senator, that the United States
policy is in fact other than he stated. It turns out that in
Australia the Australian Government - I hope the Depart+ment
of Foreign Affairs is not involved in this lack of awareness
- is simply unaware of United States policies pertaining to
this area, to our very own part of the world. Although Senator
Evans said that this was not a policy of the United States, in
yesterday's Press, namely, the Herald, is a headline: `Sub
attack "Key" to U.S. strategy'. The article states:
WASHINGTON, Reuter - U.S. ships and planes would quickly hunt
down Soviet missile submarines if a con+ventional war broke out
between them, Defence Secre+tary Caspar Weinberger said.

I think that someone is amiss in this country - the Government
or the Department of Foreign Affairs, although I think it is
more the Govern+ment's fault - because we are forced to learn
what the attitude of the United States towards our area is by
reading the newspapers. The United States did not bother to
tell the Govern+ment of this major shift in policy which, in
fact, was foreshadowed in the report by Admiral Watkins. The
United States did not bother to tell Australia that North West
Cape would be essential to the first strike hunting down of
Rus+sian nuclear submarines in the event of conven+tional
warfare in Europe. This is not the first time this has
happened. We have seen it over and over again. One very
important example of this was in 1971 when Prime Minister
McMahon attacked the visit of Opposition Leader Whitlam to
China as offensive to the United States, be+cause he was
unaware that Henry Kissinger was in China arranging a visit by
Nixon, which was announced while Whitlam was still in China.
It is time this country demanded that it be told what the
United States has in mind for our area and not be forced to
read about it in the Press of this country.

     Senator MASON (New South Wales) (5.16) - There are
several points I want to make in regard to the 1984-85 annual
report of the Department of Foreign Affairs. My first point is
that, as a member of the parliamentary delega+tion which
visited China last year, I cannot praise too highly the spirit
of enterprise and enthusiasm I found among our diplomats in
that country. China is probably the most important foreign post
we have, in many respects, and it is essential that we get
things right there where our work is concerned, especially
after such a long period in our history when we did not get
things right as far as China was concerned. Looking back, I
would especially like to com+mend to this Parliament the
dedication, hard work and intelligence of the head of mission
at that time, Mr Denis Argall, who I think at great loss to
Australia was not able to complete his term as Ambassador but
was forced to return to Australia last August because of ill
health. I wish him a speedy recovery and I hope that his
knowledge of China and the enthusiasm he showed will again be
available somewhere in the service of Australia.

     The delegation was able to meet with Mr Hu Yaobang in
Beijing. I was struck by the firmness with which Mr Hu insisted
that China intended to persist with its open door policy of co-
opera+tion in trade and joint ventures with other coun+tries
- a virtual open door as dramatic as the one that Japan made
at the time of Commodore Perry. It was certainly in vivid
contrast with what I found when I visited China in 1975,
towards the end of the Cultural Revolution. I stress this
matter because I believe that many Australians do not yet
understand how much China has changed and what great trade
oppor+tunities exist there for Australia, but, I would say, on
a hard-headed, businesslike basis because the Chinese are
certainly hard-headed enough. That was our experience of them.

     Before I went to China, I remember, someone said to me:
`What a terrific opportunity it would be if we gave every
Chinese one of a pair of Australian woollen socks, as they
would then have to buy the other half of the pair and that
would be a tremendous breakthrough'. I now hasten to assure
that person that the Chinese would immediately trade off a sock
so that half of them would have a complete pair of socks. That
is the way it is. The Chinese market is available only to
Australian business which is adaptable and which is able to
supply a good product at a competitive price. However, it is
a market that is well worth that kind of effort. It is the
world's biggest market, bigger than it has ever been before,
and interestingly enough - this is one of the main impressions
I think one gets of that country and an impression which our
diplomats stress to us again and again - Chinese society is
now turning acquisitive.

     After the years and years during the Mao era during which
the people could not have things - during which time I saw
them going through department stores looking wistfully at
consumer goods which they could not afford - they are now
reaching the stage where incomes are going up, especially
because of the incentive situation, and where there is a
market. It is a market which particularly we in Australia can
get into. The reason for that is that, as far as I can see, the
Chinese Government is in favour of Aus+tralia. We are a small
or middle country. We have never been colonists. We have never
really been in a position which would excite the Chinese to any
kind of opposition ideologically. That gives us a much more
important advantage in China, where ideology is still
important, than we might understand. There is already a large
num+ber of Australian companies operating effec+tively,
efficiently and profitably in China.

     I ask the Australian Government even if it feels that it
has undertaken a public relations campaign among business and
the community generally, to ensure that there is a good and up
to date understanding of that country. Almost any effort we can
make is worth while. As an example, it is striking that the
greater part of the earnings of a Chinese worker are in the
form of incentives which are assessed regularly on his
reliability and energy. The principal of paying people the same
whether they work hard or not has disappeared in China. When
I asked one of the new Western-suited young technocrats how
this accorded with socialist ideas, he blandly told me: `Ah,
this is the new socialism'.

     Senator Archer - Not in Australia.

     Senator MASON - If that is the case, maybe we could do
with some of it here, Senator Archer. I commend to Senator
Archer and others, Sen+ator Siddons's ideas on industrial
democracy. They passed the Senate once. Can we not go back to
that workable system of industrial de+mocracy where the work
force would be largely self-regulating and we would need the
doctri+naire unions less. I repeat that the Government could
do worse than look at the Chinese system of worker incentives
in that light.

     Senator CROWLEY (South Australia) (5.21) - Much can be
said on the annual report of the Department of Foreign Affairs.
l will resist wandering through many areas, some of which are
fairly unknown to me. I draw atten+tion in particular to two
parts of the report that I found very interesting. One is the
reference in the report to the Department's equal employ+ment
opportunity program and the women's budget program. I do so
because foreign affairs seems to be an area of little concern
for women. If women are at all concerned, they tend to have
nice soft feelings about such things as peace and foreign
affairs. That is not a real description of the situation. It
is worth noting that the Depart+ment is addressing quite
different understandings of the importance of foreign affairs
to women. I draw the Senate's attention to the difficulties I
had in reading the section on page 59 about how the Equal
Employment Opportunity Unit is con+stituted. One would need to
be a master of the alphabet to understand it, if not a
mistress. It states:

     The Committee consists of FAS (MFSD) (Chair+man); AS
Staffing and Organisation Branch (SOB); AS Operations Support
(OS); ADAB or Head of Opera+tions Support, Director, Personnel
Development, Direc+tor, Staffing and representatives of unions
and staff associations which have members working in the
Department.

I appreciate the seriousness with which the Equal Employment
Opportunity Consultative Commit+tee is taken and the
seriousness and significance of the people appointed. I simply
ask that the people writing the report in future spell out what
some of those letters mean. It is a matter of some puzzlement
to interpret them. They go to the seriousness with which the
Department addresses equal employment opportunities. The Equal
Employment Opportunity Unit addresses not only the needs of
women, but the needs of all people in our society who are
disadvantaged or not yet receiving equal opportunities within
the Australian Public Service and, in particular, within the
Department.

     Despite some efforts to address the situation, initial
statistical work reveals a similar picture in this Department
to that in the Australian Public Service as a whole. Women were
under+represented in senior and non-traditional desig+nations
and significantly underrepresented in foreign affairs officer,
consular and administra+tive streams. There were few
Aboriginals and people with disabilities had little opportunity
for career development or promotion. The Equal Employment
Opportunity Unit is looking seri+ously at ways that those
categories of under+representation can be addressed within the
De+partment. There are some challenges, particu+larly
considering disabled people or women, in that some of the
overseas appointments do not automatically follow for those
people.  But the Department is serious in addressing both considerations.

</sample>



<sample><id> H22 </id>

<note> 2024 words </note>

<source> Human rights and equal opportunity commission bills.
Parliamentary debate. Senate. 19 February, 1986.  </source>

<h> HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION BILL 1985 </h>

<h> HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1985 </h>

<h> HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION (TRANSITIONAL 
PROVISIONS AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS) BILL 1985 </h>

<h> AUSTRALIAN BILL OF RIGHTS BILL 1985 </h>

<h> Second Readings </h>

    Debate resumed.

    Senator GARETH EVANS (Victoria - Min+ister for Resources
and Energy) (6.48) - Before this debate was interrupted I had
identified the two basic themes which seemed to have run
through the opposition to the Australian Bill of Rights Bill
at least so far as the contributions in this chamber are
concerned. The first theme was that the Bill is unnecessary
and, secondly, that it is undesirable, indeed undesirable in
some people's minds to the point of being dangerous.

    As to the first point, the alleged lack of ne+cessity in
this legislation, I had begun by dealing with the argument that
the common law was the great protector of individual rights and
was, indeed, a sufficient protector of rights beyond which we
needed no support of the kind embod+ied in this Bill. I called
in aid an admirable contribution to the debate from Senator
Puplick in which he demonstrated comprehensively and precisely
just how that argument could not be sustained. The reality of
the matter is that there are a number of rights and freedoms
matters where there is a vacuum in the law and which the common
law has at the moment absolutely nothing to say. The reality
also is that there are a number of other areas where reality
also is that there are a number of other areas where the
legislatures have filled the vacuums, but in an unacceptable
way, again leaving in a different fashion the courts with
nothing to say - nothing to say because there is no hook on
which they, the judges, or the litigants before them, can hand
an argument advanced for the protection of fun+damental rights
and freedoms.

    The reality is that rights and freedoms cannot be left to
be secured by default; they do require active care and
attention by legislatures around the country. They require
active care and atten+tion both in the form of individual
measures in specific areas such as race and sex discrimination
legislation; property protection legislation; crim+inal
investigation; law protection legislation and all the other
piecemeal areas with which we have become familiar. They also
need protection by the kinds of overarching, overriding,
standard setting, guarantee-producing legislation of the kind
involved in this Bill of Rights. It is neces+sary that our
human rights performance in this country be better than it has
been in the past, whatever the standards of comparison that
might properly be made between us and many other countries in
the world with worse human rights records. We have done well
in the past but we can do a lot better. The judges and courts
could do with the extra reinforcement and weaponry in the
interests of rights and liberties which this Bill will give
them.

    Let me turn to the group of arguments which says that this
Bill of Rights is positively undesir+able and dangerous. So
many statements which have been made here and outside the
Parliament have been so wildly and grotesquely astray that they
have been difficult to take seriously. Let me at least try to
deal quickly with some of the more extravagant claims that have
been made. A lot of more detailed points, I guess, can be made
during the Committee stage of this debate, which I do not think
will be short.

    Firstly, we have had the constantly reiterated and
dogmatically asserted argument that this is a Bill which takes
away rights, that fewer rights will be enjoyed in the community
than before the Bill of Rights was ever dreamed of. The basic
argument which seems to prevail when people run this line is
that a number of rights around the place which are recognised
as impor+tant or in some cases fundamental are not
spe+cifically addressed in this Bill. The right to own property
and not to have it acquired unjustly or compulsorily is often
repeated as being in this category. As I said earlier in this
speech, and no doubt will be saying again a dozen times before
this debate is out, this Bill of Rights contains a very central
and important Article which pro+tects absolutely, unequivocally
and clearly those rights which may exist but which are not set
out in the list in this Bill. I am referring to Article 2 of
the Bill of Rights, which makes it absolutely clear that any
right which is not set out in the Bill of Rights, but which may
otherwise exist, is not to be regarded as diminished in any way
by not appearing in this otherwise fairly compre+hensive list.

    A second claim that is made about the alleged dangers of
the Bill goes to the suggestion that it gives protection to
certain alleged rights around the place, or claims of right,
which, if protected, would undermine the fabric of society.
Thus, it is suggested that the Bill would operate to legal+ise
abortion, to encourage and legalise homosex+ual adoption, to
authorise the confiscation of private property, and half a
dozen extravagant claims of this kind. I can assert absolutely,
with+out fear of rational contradiction, that claims of this
kind are absolutely false and without foundation.

    I give just one example of a claim which has been made and
which featured as recently as Senator Lewis's contribution to
this debate late this afternoon; that is, the extravagant claim
that this Bill, at least in its original form, would have
operated so as to legalise homosexual marriage. How on earth
could anyone read into any of the provisions of this Bill that
it could legalise hom+osexual marriage? A lot of people have
chosen to read that in because of the language of the first
draft of this Bill of Rights, which simply said:

    All persons have the right to marry. Every man and woman of
marriageable age shall have the right to marry.

So we had the lunatic argument that `all persons' meant,
construed literally, that men could marry men and women could
marry women. All I say in relation to that is that I do not
think it is seriously advanced by any of the people around this
place that the Pope is in favour of homosex+ual marriage. Yet
we have a document, the Charter of the Rights of the Family,
presented a little while ago by the Holy See, in which we find
in Article 1, as the pre-eminent right of the family, the
proposition, not qualified in any way by reference to `opposite
sex' or language of this kind, which states:

    All persons have the right . . . to marry . . . every man
and every woman, having reached marriage age . . . has the
right to marry . . .

That is the kind of distortion we get. Nobody would remotely
think that language of that kind could be construed as an
invitation to, encour+agement of or justification for
homosexual mar+riage, yet such is the perverse, twisted and
distorted - sometimes deliberately so - mentality that people
have taken to the Bill of Rights that they have asserted that
language like this, which appears in a document from the Holy
See, is capable of that construction when it appears in the
Australian Bill of Rights Bill. It is a non+sensical chain of
argument, one which we have heard ad nauseum and about which
we have been driven to distraction.

     Then we have the alleged dangers involved in leaving the
interpretation of rights to unelected judges, as distinct from
distinguished parliamen+tarians and self-restrained legislators
of the kind who have acted in civil liberties matters in the
past. There are several answers to that claim. This is a theme
which again can be picked up in more detail at the Committee
stage. The first is that it underestimates dramatically the
extent to which judges are already involved in deter+mining
sensitive issues in their administration of the common law; in
particular, in a system such as ours with a written
Constitution, in adjudicat+ing on disputes that arise under
that Constitu+tion. Judges have a sensitive and delicate task
already involving the exercise of judgment, which they exercise
very well, and it is nonsense to suggest that they will be
exercising some funda+mentally new role in any potentially
dangerous way as a result of this legislation being passed. I
quote from one of the most distinguished law lords in British
judicial history, Lord Scarman, who, in a lecture in 1980,
said:

    We can, therefore, dismiss as completely unsound such
objections as those which, frequently heard in the United
Kingdom, are variations on the theme that judges must not be
brought into the political arena. They are there already - as
umpires, not gladiators or competitors. They have always been
there: and there they will re+main. There is nothing
inappropriate in requiring judges to decide justiciable issues
arising in a political struggle: and no reason for judges not
to be trusted to act judicially and according to law, though
the case raises political as well as legal questions.

There is a comprehensive and very effective rebuttal of that
particular line of argument. One can expect Australian judges
to find the inter+pretation of the Bill of Rights an unfamiliar
task, but we can reasonably expect them to cope very well with
that task, just as their brethren in Canada have. I had the
pleasure of talking about just this issue with the Canadian
Chief Justice, Sir Brian Dickson, very recently. He made just
that point; that a Bill of Rights, although ini+tially
unfamiliar, had become part of the judicial landscape and the
courts are responding to it constructively and effectively.

    Finally, the answer to the concern about the role of an
unelected judiciary is that under this kind of legislation, and
designedly so, Parliament has the last word. If the judgment
of the courts goes astray, in the opinion of this Parliament,
we will retain the capacity to legislate an appro+priate
amendment accordingly. Among this lit+any of complaints about
the dangers associated with the Bill of Rights, a number of
suggestions are made about the dangerous powers being vested
in the Human Rights and Equal Oppor+tunity Commission. It is
extraordinary that so much should be made of this and so little
regard should be had to the character of this institution that
is being created, or very largely recreated out of the existing
Human Rights Commission, because it is an institution which
exercises inves+tigative, conciliatory and reporting functions
in exactly the same way as scores of other similar institutions
now enshrined in statute law at both Commonwealth and State
levels with powers that are not in any significant way
different from the powers exercised by dozens of other similar
institutions.

    The Government is prepared and willing to listen carefully
to arguments that may be made in the Committee stage on this
question. It may be that different views can reasonably be held
on the scale of penalties or the need for self-incrimination
provisions of the kind that appear in some 90 other statutes.
The argument may be made, which we will listen to, about the
need for compulsory conferences and so on, but I simply do not
accept the validity of the root and branch attack that has been
made. I particularly do not accept it when I have regard, as
I hope other honourable senators will, to the very clear
precedent which exists in the Human Rights Commission, which
now exists as a result of legislation enacted by the Fraser
Government. The element of hypocrisy and humbug in the attack
on the proposed Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
model, when one com+pares what is involved in the proposal here
with what exists at the moment, is really quite breathtaking.

    Let me finish by saying this: None of the criticism that
has been made of the Bill has in any way destroyed its
credibility as the most far+reaching and far-sighted attempt
in our history to secure the protection of fundamental rights
and liberties. 

</sample>



<sample><id> H23  </id>

<note> 2031 words </note>

<source> Death of Mr Olof Palme. House of Representatives. 11 March, 1986 </source>

Madam SPEAKER (Hon. Joan Child) took the chair at 2 p.m., and
read prayers.

<h> PRIVILEGE </h>

  Mr SINCLAIR (New England - Leader of the National Party of
Australia) - Madam Speaker, I wish to raise a matter of
privilege, but I understand that it would suit your convenience
if the matter were deferred until the item dealing with
Commonwealth Day is behind us.

Madam SPEAKER - Yes, I think that would suit the House.

<h> DEATH OF MR OLOF PALME </h>

  Mr HAWKE (Wills - Prime Minister) - I move:
  That this House express its profound sadness at the death on
1 March 1986 of Mr Olof Palme, Prime Minister of Sweden, its
condemnation of the brutal act which took his life, and its
condolences to Mr Palme's family and to the Government and
people of Sweden.

I am sure that all members of the House were shocked and
saddened to hear of Olof Palme's murder. Such a criminal act
should receive the strongest condemnation. Prime Minister
Palme's tragic and untimely death was a great loss to Sweden
and the world. He had served his coun+try in various portfolios
since 1963 and was Prime Minister of his country for 11 years.
In the Swedish context, notable for its tradition of peace and
non-violence, the senseless futility of this act stands out the
more starkly.

  Sweden has lost an outstanding leader - a man with a deep
personal political philosophy and strong social democratic
ideals. As Prime Minis+ter, Olof Palme worked vigorously towards
maintaining a strong economy, achieving full em+ployment and
safeguarding the welfare of all. But it was a notable feature
of his leadership that his concern for economic and social
justice did not end with the affairs of his own country. He
brought the same passionate commitment to these ideals to bear
on his approach to world affairs and did so, moreover, with a
real depth of intellect. Olof Palme was a man devoted to
promoting economic development, social justice and peace and
he understood the inter-relation+ship of these objectives.

  Mr Palme's global commitment to the demo+cratic process and to
the rights, freedoms and wellbeing of all people is attested
by the policies he adopted. His stand for fundamental human
rights can be seen in his championing of the campaign against
racism. He promoted a gener+ous refugee policy, believing it to
be an impor+tant expression of international humanitarian
solidarity. He believed that rich nations should join in the
struggle against poverty to achieve a more just world order.

  Olof Palme was Vice-President of the Socialist International
and led its working group on the southern Africa question. He
was a member of the important Brandt Commission which studied
questions concerning the relationship between rich and poor
nations. In November 1980 Mr Palme was appointed as
representative of the United Nations Secretary-General to seek
a peaceful resolution of the Iran/Iraq conflict. He stood firm
on Sweden's policy of neutrality and worked tirelessly to
promote world peace and disarmament. Olof Palme's contribution
to the international debate on arms control and disar+mament won
him wide acclaim during his chair+manship of the Commission on
Disarmament and Security from 1980 to 1982. The Commis+sion's
report bears the Palme imprint in the importance it attaches
to the objective of joint survival rather than the threat of
mutual de+struction as the basis for a true and lasting peace.

  Olof Palme was an idealist without illusions. He recognised
that general and complete disar+mament was a long term objective
which could be achieved only through patient and careful
negotiations that took account of international security
concerns, and those of the United States and the Soviet Union
in particular. Palme did not consider nuclear deterrence to be
an accept+able permanent basis for international peace and
stability, but he accepted that it is the only viable option
as an interim security measure while arms control negotiations
take place. The Australian Government's approach to arms con+trol 
and disarmament shares many of the per+spectives of the
Palme report on these issues.

  Olof Palme also played a significant role in the setting up 
in 1984 of the Conference on Disarmament in Europe, which 
aims to build confidence and reduce the risk of conflict 
be+tween states in Europe. Olof Palme firmly be+lieved, as 
the Australian Government does, that questions of peace and
disarmament in the nu+clear age should be the concern of all
nations and should not be left for the nuclear weapon states
and the big powers alone to determine. His passing is a great
loss to all of us throughout the world, regardless of
ideological divisions be+tween those in the East and those in
the West and regardless of economic divisions between the
people of the North and those of the South. It is for his
contribution to the noble goal of tran+scending such divisions
which exist in this imper+fect world that Olof Palme will be
remembered most widely.

  Senator Don Grimes, the Deputy Leader of the Government in the
Senate and Minister for Community Services, will represent the
Govern+ment at Olof Palme's funeral, which is to be held in
Stockholm on 15 March. Senator Grimes was a personal friend of
the late Prime Minister, having met him on a number of
occasions at meetings of the Socialist International, and is
also a friend of Mr Palme's widow, Lisbeth. The attendance of
Senator Grimes at the funeral is a mark of the deep respect
which the Australian Government has for Olof Palme's
achievements in the cause of world peace and social justice,
and of the friendship which Australia feels for the Government
and people of Sweden. It would be fitting, Madam Speaker, if
the terms of the resolution could be passed on to Mr Palme's
family and to the Government of Sweden.

  Mr HOWARD (Bennelong - Leader of the Opposition) - The Opposition
supports the mo+tion of condolence moved by the Prime Minister
(Mr Hawke). It is always with a particular degree of horror
that the world reacts to politi+cal assassination. The
circumstances of Mr Palme's untimely death draw properly from
the Prime Minister and the House universal condem+nation of such
mindless and unjustified acts of terrorism and are a reminder
to all of us of the relatively precarious nature of the lives
of those who wish to live out the democratic ideal.

  Whatever one's views may be about Olof Palme's political views
within the broad Western democratic spectrum, he was a
dedicated sup+porter of the ideal of peace amongst nations. He
served his country as Prime Minister for 11 years. He was
respected in international political forums, and properly so.
He worked very hard for the cause of world peace and lived
out, in his political and personal life, the ideals in which
he believed. I very warmly associate the Oppo+sition with the
words of condolence in relation to his death and the words of
condemnation properly delivered by the Prime Minister regard+ing 
the circumstances of his very tragic and untimely assassination.

  Mr SINCLAIR (New England - Leader of the National Party of
Australia) - On behalf of the members of the National Party of
Australia, I too would like to endorse the motion of condol+ence 
submitted to this House by the Prime Min+ister (Mr Hawke)
on the death of Mr Olof Palme, the Prime Minister of Sweden.
Much has been written and said of Olof Palme in Aus+tralia,
Europe, and elsewhere. He was a Swedish leader who was known as
much outside Sweden as he was within it. He was a man whose
name and reputation for the cause of peace won ac+claim from all
sides of politics and many of the precepts and statements he
issued, both on his own and officially, have become well known
in the general tracts of the international commu+nity. Indeed,
the volume that he produced on peace and disarmament security
which he sub+mitted to the United Nations was one of the
bulwarks within which it is still hoped that ne+gotiation will
continue towards disarmament around the world.
  There are aspects of his life that I think many of us would do
well to emulate. He certainly is one who, having been born as
an aristocrat, devoted much of his life towards the cause of
others. He was a man who worked for peace throughout his life,
yet sadly died by a gun. It is a tragedy that one who had so
much to contrib+ute and who through his life did so much for
others should have died this way. On behalf of all the members
of my Party we submit our condolences not only to the nation
and the people of Sweden but also to his wife and family.

  Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor - Minister for Science) - Olof Palme was
the inheritor of a remarkable, even unique political tradition.
He was only the fourth leader in the history of the Swedish
Social Democratic Party, and all four leaders from 1896 held
the office of Prime Min+ister - Haljmer Branting, Per Albin
Hansson, Tage Erlander and Olof Palme. Sweden is also
noteworthy for its absence of political violence. As was
frequently noted in the last few days, Palme's was the first
political assassination in Sweden since the murder of King
Gustav III in 1792, nearly 200 years ago. The traditions of
tolerance, liberalism and compassion have been built into the
Swedish social fabric. Palme was a tireless crusader for world
peace and human rights. Although his outspoken views made ene+mies 
of some great powers at various times, both the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
were united in ex+pressing their outrage at his savage and
inexpl+icable murder. All Australians unite in our abhorrence
of political assassination of rule by the gun. His death
follows that of his mentor, Alva Myrdal, a Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate, just a few months ago. Like her, his work deserves
international recognition. It would be entirely appropriate for
him to receive posthumously the Nobel Peace Prize for 1986. Not
all such awards have been equally well deserved. In Olof
Palme's case it would be.

  Dr THEOPHANOUS (Calwell) - I rise to say a few words in relation
to the work of Olof Palme in the development of democratic
socialist tradition and democratic socialist theory. Olof Palme
believed that it was possible to develop a political system and
a political tradition which on the one hand was opposed to the
general conservative tradition and on the other hand was not
in line with the Marxist-Leninist tradition of the Soviet
countries. Palme's work in relation to the development of
democratic socialist thought and tradition has had an enormous
impact on the Socialist International, of which the Austra+lian
Labor Party is a member party. He was behind much of the
inspiration for the Socialist International's resurgence in
recent times and for the getting together of social democratic
par+ties in order to help not only to achieve peace, as people
have mentioned before, but also to deal with some of the
fundamental problems concerning the issue of the Third World-
First World relations and the poverty of the Third World. As
the Minister for Science (Mr Barry Jones) has said, Olof Palme
was an outstanding man in our time. His contribution has been
enormous and his death is a very great and sad loss.

  Mr TICKNER (Hughes) - I had not intended to make any remarks on
this occasion, but I am moved by what I believe to be the great
impor+tance of it to briefly make my personal tribute to Mr Olof
Palme. I did not meet the former Prime Minister, unlike our
Minister for Com+munity Services (Senator Grimes). However, I
heard him speak on one occasion when I at+tended a conference
of the international union of local authorities in Stockholm.
His contribu+tion to that conference will live with me for the
rest of my life. I believe that his world leadership in
attempting to promote international peace could not be borne
out in any more substantial way than by the fact that upon his
death, Pres+ident Reagan praised his `untiring efforts to pro+mote
peace', while in Moscow the delegates to The Communist Party
Congress rose for a min+ute's silence in tribute. 

</sample>



<sample><id> H24 </id>

<note> 2026 words </note>

<source> Aboriginal land rights. House of Representatives. 18 March 1986. </source>

<h> Ministerial Statement </h>
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports - Minister for Aboriginal Affairs) - by 
leave - Honourable members will be aware that, on 3 March, last I 
announced a number of decisions that the Gov+ernment made concerning 
Aboriginal land rights and related matters. It is appropriate that 
I should inform the House of those decisions. For the information 
of honourable members let me outline the recent course of events. 
In February last year the Government released for public discussion 
a draft set of proposals for a national Aboriginal land rights model. 
This model was the result of almost two years of consultation with
members of a panel of Aboriginal leaders consisting of representatives 
of land councils and members of the then National Aboriginal Conference. 

  Following consideration by the Government of some 260 submissions from 
interested parties, I was able to announce in August last year that the 
Government had endorsed the principles contained in the model as an 
appropriate, rea+sonable and balanced basis for Aboriginal land rights 
throughout Australia. At the same time the Government also made clear 
its preference for land rights to be implemented by State ac+tion
broadly consistent with the Common+wealth's principles rather than by 
overriding legislation. Therefore I had a specific direction from 
Cabinet to engage in discussions with the States to see what action 
could be taken on a State by State basis. That position was clear and 
unequivocal and was well known to Aboriginal leadership who in many 
cases rejected the pro+posed model. Of course this Government accepts 
that the 1967 referendum I gave the Common+wealth a special and overriding
responsibility for the welfare of Aboriginal people. We have em+braced 
that responsibility. 

  Since coming to office, this Government has increased spending
on programs for Aboriginal advancement, through my portfolio
and those of a number of my colleagues, by over two-thirds.
Responsibility for Aboriginal advancement does not, as some
would believe, lie solely with the Commonwealth as a result of
the 1967 referen+dum. It is a shared responsibility. Aborigines
are citizens of the States like everybody else. They are
entitled to look to the States to provide them with those basic
services that State governments normally provide to their
citizens.

  In the course of my negotiations with the States, it was made
clear to them that the Com+monwealth regarded it as imperative
that the States should be prepared to grant secure title to
Aboriginal citizens in respect of land which they had
traditionally occupied. That is still this Government's
position. I am sure that it would come as no surprise that no
State government has suggested to me that the Commonwealth
should take pre-emptive action in this matter. While their
motives may have varied consider+ably, the underlying premise
is clear; Tasmania aside, the States accept that they have a
respon+sibility. Acceptance of that responsibility has seen
progress made in the provision of secure title to Aboriginal
people.

  In New South Wales, legislation was intro+duced in 1983 which
transferred to local Aborig+inal land councils approximately
171 square kilometres of land. That legislation also provides
for claims to be made over certain Crown land, and earmarks
funds for future land acquisition. Last year the Acting Premier
informed the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke) that he believed that
his State's legislation adequately meets the needs of the
Aboriginal citizens of New South Wales and there was no need
for either the preferred model or any other overriding
legislation. That view was strongly endorsed by both the
Secretary of the State Ministry for Aboriginal Affairs, Ms Pat
O'Shane, and the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council.


  Discussions between the Commonwealth and Victorian governments
have led to a broad in-principle agreement on the question of
land rights in that State. The Victorian Government has
prepared legislation for the handing over of title to
Framlingham Reserve and other related leg+islation, the basic
details of which have been discussed and agreed between the
Victorian Government and ourselves. An all-party parlia+mentary
committee of the Victorian Parliament has also reported to the
Government on the question of compensation for dispossession.
While this report is directed to the problems of Victo+rian
Aboriginal people, it deals with very impor+tant principles
which are of immense relevance to all Aboriginal people living
in urban or re+gional fringe situations and whose rights would
not be significantly benefited by any land rights legislation.
I am involved in discussions with the Victorian Government
about the role that the Commonwealth might be expected to play
in the development of the principles outlined in that report.

  I refer next to South Australia. Large areas of that State have
been transferred to Aboriginal ownership. In 1981, title to
100,000 square kilometres in the north-west of the State passed
to the Pitjantjatjara people. In 1984, similar legislation
provided for Aboriginal ownership of 76,000 square kilometres
of Maralinga lands. This legislation was finally passed by the
Legis+lative Council of South Australia after the threat of
Commonwealth intervention. A land trust holds title to other
reserves in that State. Having lived with land rights
legislation both major po+litical parties are agreed as to its
benefits. The South Australian Leader of the Opposition 
en+dorsed the position of the Premier of South Australia when he
said recently of land rights legislation in that State: `We
have good, fair, workable land rights here'. He is right.

  In Queensland, discussions have continued with the Minister for
Community Services, who has indicated his Government's
intention to issue deeds of grants in trust to all reserve
communi+ties and to provide those communities with an
administrative structure based on the principles of local
government. It is the intention of the Queensland Minister that
reserve communities have control over their own economic and
social affairs within three years. The Queensland Min+ister and
I have agreed with reserve council chairmen that working
parties representing Commonwealth, State and Aboriginal reserve
community interests should address the details of establishing
such a structure on a community by community basis. Working
parties should ad+dress themselves to a range of concerns, from
the ownership of stock and plant to the payment of award wages
and law and order issues.

  In the Torres Strait Islands, the Prime Minis+ter and I met with
Islander leadership and ad+dressed their concerns for self-
management. Following these discussions, and on the basis of
the Queensland Government issuing the deeds of grant in trust,
it was agreed that the Common+wealth would provide funding for
both water and electricity supplies as well as financial 
as+sistance to enable the devolution of self-manage+ment through
the Islander consultative council. This will involve the
training of Islanders in responsibilities which are presently
carried out by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. The
facilities of the Department will be made avail+able to this new
self-management structure. As there is comparatively little
unalienated Crown land in Queensland, legislation based on the
pre+ferred model would be of limited benefit to the great
majority of Aborigines living outside re+serves. The needs of
this group will have to be addressed by other policies and
initiatives based upon the principle of compensation for
dispossession.

  In Western Australia, efforts to legislate for land rights were
defeated by the conservative forces in the gerrymandered
Legislative Council, aided by a disgraceful campaign of
fearmonger+ing by the mining industry. However, following recent
negotiations with the Western Australian Government, that
Government has indicated its concern to meet the land needs of
Aboriginal people through the following arrangements, the main
features of which are: The State will pro+vide secure title to
Aboriginal reserves by way of long term leases for a minimum
of 99 years; 45 other reserves under the control of the State
Department of Community Services also will be transferred to
Aboriginal control; the acquisition of further land is to be
the subject of discussion between the Commonwealth and the
Western Australian Government; the States will acceler+ate the
process of providing excisions from pas+toral leases for living
areas for Aborigines, in conjunction with the churches, the
State will continue facilitating the transfer to Aboriginal
people of mission lands used for Aboriginal pur+poses;
Aboriginal groups in the Kimberley will benefit from the
proposed restructuring of the pastoral industry in that region
of Western Aus+tralia following the financial assistance from
the Commonwealth; Aboriginal advancement pro+grams will continue
to receive emphasis; the Commonwealth is offering additional
funds av+eraging $10m a year, for a five year period, to
match the State's efforts under this new pro+gram; a committee
will be established to advise the State Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs on the terms and conditions on which entry permits will
be given for access to Aboriginal land for the purpose of
mineral exploration and mining; and an agreed basis for the
payment of mining roy+alty equivalents when mining takes place
on Aboriginal land.

  Cabinet has decided that this offer constitutes an acceptable
basis for detailed negotiations with the State Government.
Those negotiations are proceeding. I have already had
preliminary dis+cussions with the new Western Australian 
Min+ister for Aboriginal Affairs, Mr Ernie Bridge. Aboriginal
leadership in Western Australia will also be involved in the
process of considering these proposals.             

  In Tasmania, the only progress that can be reported is the
recognition by the State Govern+ment of the existence of its
Aboriginal citizens. In that State the Government has been
stubborn in its refusal to take action beyond this simple
recognition. It has thus failed to further the interests of
this important group. While Aborig+inal people in Tasmania would
be unable to lay claim on the basis of traditional ownership
to land, using criteria that apply under the North+ern Territory
land rights legislation, there are still areas of special
significance, such as Oyster Cove and Wybalenna. Here again the
principles of compensation for dispossession as set out in the
Victorian parliamentary report may prove relevant. Aboriginal
people in Tasmania can be assured that their aspirations in
respect of such areas will be addressed by the Commonwealth
with the newly elected State Government.

  As the Prime Minister recently informed the National Press
Club, we will continue to nego+tiate with the States. We will
continue to seek to advance the interests of Aboriginal people
through co-operation with the States where that is possible.
Such an approach does not involve any diminution of
Commonwealth responsibility. Aboriginal people will enjoy a
better outcome, and sooner, in a much better social
environment, by means of such a process. Against this back+ground 
of continuing dialogue and progress with the States the
Government has taken the view that the implementation of
legislation based on the preferred model is not warranted at
this time.

  I turn now to the Government's proposal to amend the Aboriginal
Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976, which I will bring
before the Parliament during the current sittings. It
should be recalled that in the Northern Territory when we came
to government there had been one review of the legislation
which had not been acted upon. Nor had any action been taken,
at either a State or*of Federal level, to deal with the problems
of Aboriginal people living under Third World conditions on
pastoral leases. A seven year freeze on exploration in the
Territory cre+ated a backlog of applications for exploration
licences that, when lifted, imposed a burden which made quick
responses from the Aboriginal land councils to mining proposals
impossible. In general terms the Act will be amended in ac+cordance 
with the suggestions put forward by Mr Justice Toohey,
a former Aboriginal Land Commissioner, in his review of the
legislation which was tabled in this House on 5 March 1984. We
also have under consideration the pro+posals of Dr Jon Altman
in his review of the Aboriginals Benefit Trust Account.

  The Government received strong representa+tions from Aboriginal
groups, the churches, com+munity leaders and individuals
supporting the need for Aboriginals to be able to control
mining on their land in order that their spiritual and cultural
well-being might be protected. Against this background, and
bearing in mind the con+cerns which the Northern Territory
Government and the mining industry have with the veto in its
present form, the Government proposes to retain the essential
elements of the veto while introducing a number of changes to
its operation designed to reduce delay and uncertainty. 

</sample>



<sample><id> H25 </id>

<note> 2001 words </note>

<source> Migration program 1986-87. House of Representatives. 10 April 1986 </source>

Madam SPEAKER (Hon. Joan Child) took the chair at 10 a.m., and
read prayers.

<h> MIGRATION PROGRAM 1986-87 </h>
<h> Ministerial Statement </h>
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide - Minister for Im+migration and Ethnic
Affairs) - by leave - The purpose of this statement is to
announce the Government's migration program for 1986-87. In
doing so, I would first like to draw the attention of honourable
members to the demographic and economic issues relevant to
Australia's popula+tion and immigration policies in the longer
term. While current economic and social circumstan+ces are
important in setting immigration pro+grams, the Government is
conscious of the importance of the questions of the longer term
benefits and costs which must be addressed if Australia is to
exploit its full potential.

  Immigration intakes of recent years have com+bined with
decreasing natural increase to pro+duce population growth rates
well below historical experience. Since 1946 the average an+nual 
population growth rate has been 1.85 per cent; as recently
as 1983-84 it fell to as low as 1.15 per cent. About half of
post-World War II population growth has been due to natural 
in+crease and the other half directly the result of migration.
However, immigration has had a sig+nificant indirect stimulus
through natural increase.

  Although Australia's population is still slowly increasing by
virtue of natural increase alone, this will persist only while
the age structure of our population remains relatively young.
The level of Australian fertility is currently 10 per cent
below the long term population replace+ment level and there is
little chance of a recov+ery. Although Australia's level of
mortality is low, still declining, and satisfactory by global
comparisons, the crude death rate will rise as the population
progressively ages. With a contin+uation of these trends in
births and deaths, Aus+tralia's population would begin to
decline half way through the next century, in the absence of
immigration.

  While still relatively young, the Australian population is also
ageing progressively. Honour+able members will be aware that this 
develop+ment has significant welfare, taxation, labour market and 
economic consequences. Short of substantial increases in recent 
levels of immigra+tion, the ageing of the population will 
accelerate sharply early in the next century. If current levels 
of immigration are retained, the aged de+pendency ratio would
increase by 58 per cent by the year 2021. This ratio broadly
relates those in retirement age to those available to the
labour market. A 58 per cent increase in this ratio would have
dramatic and far-reaching social and economic consequences. No
society and no gov+ernment can responsibly ignore these trends.

  Immigration cannot reverse ageing of the pop+ulation but it can
retard the process. Over the last decade or so, the average age
of new settlers has been some five years younger than the av+erage 
age of the resident population. To retard the ageing
process significantly will require a sustained return to more
traditional, historical levels of immigration programs.

  Population is not merely a question of num+bers, growth rates
or age profiles. The distribu+tional impact of migration, both
international and internal, cannot be ignored. The Govern+ment
is conscious of the propensity of migrants to settle in
existing urban communities, but it does not regard this as an
issue which can be properly addressed in a migration context
alone, given that people in Australia are free to choose the
place in which they will live and work. Recent research
demonstrates that migrants are at least as mobile and flexible
as their Austra+lian-born counterparts, particularly in the
early years of settlement. Equally, proper concerns about
environmental issues are relevant to pop+ulation growth and
immigration programs. Ulti+mately, however, the capacity of a
nation to address environmental concerns largely resides in
areas other than immigration, including ca+pacity to generate
economic wealth, a sufficient tax base and technological
sophistication.

  Immigration levels cannot be determined in isolation from
permanent and long term depar+tures. In recent years permanent
departures have fluctuated from a low of 19,500 in 1980-81 to
a high of 25,000 in 1982-83. They have resulted in substantial
losses of skilled workers. Accordingly, the contribution of net
permanent migration to the Australian labour market has been
substan+tially less than the contribution of permanent settlers
alone.

  I turn now to the economic implications of immigration. Recent
research undertaken by the Committee for the Economic Development 
of Australia, CEDA, and my Department is rele+vant to our 
understanding of the role of immi+gration in the Australian 
economy. It is generally accepted that research of this kind 
is complex and based in part on econometric models, and
that the findings have to be seen in that light. However, the
more significant research findings are sufficiently important
to include in this state+ment. Until recently, many
Australians, and not least Australian opinion leaders, have
subscribed to the populist view that during periods of high
unemployment or economic downturn immigra+tion is
disadvantageous to the employment pros+pects of Australians
seeking to enter the labour market. These mistaken perceptions
need serious attention. I draw the attention of honourable
members to three of the CEDA research find+ings. The first is
that immigration has contrib+uted positively to economic growth
and development. The second is that immigration, even in the
very short term, does not adversely affect the employment
prospects of the Austra+lian resident population, with few
localised and particular exceptions. The third is that the
skill, education, age and self-sufficiency profiles of a
particular intake are perhaps more important than the overall
scale of any one intake.

  In relation to this question of education and skills, the
Government has noted the call for higher levels of skilled
labour and business mi+gration. The Economic Planning Advisory
Coun+cil, EPAC, suggested that the skill composition and base
of the Australian labour force could be enhanced in the medium
term from increases in these programs. Whilst agreeing with
these views, the Government is equally committed to upgrad+ing
the skill base of the Australian community by appropriate
education, training and retraining policies and programs.

  In the long term, population policy objectives and economic
rationality will be best served by a progressive return to more
traditional levels of immigration. This return must be gradual,
in part because the lead times in immigration are significant.
Australia faces as much international competition for people
with positive economic attributes as it does for commodity and
capital markets. If anything, the level of competition is
likely to sharpen in the medium to longer term. The Government
sees properly managed popu+lation growth and immigration as an
important strategy for economic policy options. All eco+nomic
policy instruments involve short and long term benefits and
costs, and immigration is no exception .

  In looking at the long term future the Govern+ment is concerned
to awaken Australia's interest in, and appreciation of, the
population dimen+sion. The appendices to this statement, which
I shall table at the end of my speech, underpin the statement
and provide a basis for an informed understanding of where we 
are and where we are headed. I recently asked the National 
Popu+lation Council to develop and advise me on long term 
population options for Australia. I expect that the Council's 
advice and the statement I have made will both serve to elicit 
public com+ment on these longer term population and im+migration 
issues.

  It should be noted that, if it were decided that Australia's
population by the year 2000 should be about 19 million, then
that outcome would be achieved by an average annual immigration
program of 120,000. If it were decided that there should be a
population target of some 30 million by the year 2038, the
250th year of European settlement of this continent, then such
an out+come would be reached with an average annual migrant
intake of 160,000. Both outcomes would be more likely were
fertility rates to recover to higher levels. In either event,
both could be achieved by manageable progressive increases in
recent levels of immigration to intakes compa+rable to those
experienced in the 1940s and 1960s when the population base and
Australia's absorption capacity were substantially less then
they are now or will be in the future.

  Australia's aim should be to see its immigra+tion program in
the context both of humane and community concerns and of
population and eco+nomic development needs. Our understanding
must be that immigrants, carefully selected, cre+ate more jobs
than they take. It is against this philosophical and factual
background that the Government has considered the migration
pro+gram for 1986-87 and indicative planning levels for the
subsequent two years. In developing the program the Government
has had the benefit of formal advice from employers, trade
unions, community groups, State governments, local government
representatives, academics and the National Population Council.
We propose a pro+gram of 95,000 visa issues and change of
status approvals in 1986-87. This compares with an expected
outcome of 89,000 in the current year and a planning level of
84,000. It represents a modest initial increase, and one I
expect will be achieved.

  For the two subsequent years the Government has set indicative
planning levels of 110,000 and 125,000, respectively. These
levels are no more than indicative for planning purposes. They
could represent the beginnings of a possible gradual increase
in immigration which may thereby, sub+ject to community support
following from con+sultation on resources and needs, return by
managed steps to historical intake levels of 160,000 to 170,000 
or about I per cent of pop+ulation at that time. These are 
decisions for the future - but the foundations are being laid.

  I announce one major change and initiative to the structure of
the migration program of inter+est to all honourable members.
The Government has decided to develop the concept of an
inde+pendent and concessional migration category to attract a
wider and more numerous number of people with the potential to
contribute to Aus+tralia's economic and social needs. This
category is based on the principles of the current ex+tended
family (category C) program, which as honourable members would
know, covers spon+sored adult siblings and non-dependant
children. Applicants will be required to achieve a pass mark
of 70 points on the existing points system which relates to the
age, employability, educa+tion and skill characteristics of the
potential migrant. In recognition of the economic support that
family in Australia can provide, concession+ary points will be
given to adult brothers and sisters and non-dependent children
(10 points out of 70) and nephews and nieces (5 points).

  In summary, the new independent and conces+sionary migration
category brings benefits from the economic gains to Australia
from the people likely to succeed in their migration
applications, whilst recognising at the same time the economic
and social advantages of the extended family nexus. This
category is not one of entitlements but one of optimising human
and economic real+ities. Effectively, the Government is
concerned here with attracting people Australia needs,
mo+tivationally, economically and in terms of popu+lation
building and the retardation of aging. Would-be independent
migrants with no family ties but who adequately meet the
criteria of employability, self-sufficiency, youth, skills and/
or education will still be eligible to be included in our
expanding migration program.

  At the same time, I emphasise the Govern+ment maintains its
commitment to reunion of immediate family. The family unit for
us is the Australian family unit based on husband, wife,
dependent children and retired parents. For aged parents of
independent means, spouses and de+pendent children, entry is
virtually automatic. On present levels of demand, I estimate
a pro+gram of 26,000 visas in 1986-87 compared with an
estimated outcome of 25,000 in 1985-86. A sensitive element has
been the Vietnam family migration program, which relies on the
contin+ued co-operation of the Vietnamese Govern+ment. It needs
to be understood that in return for their responsibility to 
integrate into and con+tribute to Australian society, one of the
rights given to migrants is to be reunited with imme+diate family.
But this right does not flow over to the extended family. Extended
family members are given preference for migration, more so in
Australia than in the United States or Canada, but they must qualify
for migration on the basis of the potential contribution they can
make to Australian society.

</sample>




<sample><id> H26 </id>

<note> 2015 words </note>

<source> Macquarie university: study at Macquarie 1987. A guide to 
undergraduate programs. </source>

<h> GENERAL INFORMATION </h>

<h> Establishment </h>

Macquarie University was established by an Act of the New South
Wales State Parliament in June 1964. The University accepted a
small number of postgraduate students in 1966 and began the
teaching of undergraduates in 1967. It was the third university to
be established in the met+ropolitan area of Sydney.

<h> Location </h>

The University is located on a 135-hectare site at North Ryde in
the north-western suburbs of Syd+ney, approximately eighteen
kilometres from the centre of the city. (See map on inside back cover.)

<h> Campus Plan </h>

The central part of the campus is occupied by eighteen buildings
for teaching and research, together with the University Library,
the Univer+sity Union building (with an associated commer+cial
centre), the Council Building (which houses administrative
offices), and the Macquarie Theatre. The surrounding and outlying
areas are used for purposes such as University student housing,
affiliated residential colleges, parking, sporting facilities, a
biological resources area and open parkland.

Every effort has been made by the planners to retain the
original rural nature of the site. Gum trees, native shrubs and
lawns have been plan+ted around the buildings, and there are
extensive areas of natural bushland around the perimeters of the
campus

<h> Enrolment </h>

Macquarie University now has more than 20,000 graduates. Its 1986 
enrolment stands at over 11,500. In terms of total student numbers 
Mac+quarie is now the sixth largest of Australia's nine+teen universities.

<h> Academic Structure </h>

Macquarie is unique among New South Wales universities in its
academic structure. In order to allow students as much freedom 
as possible in their choice of studies, the University has moved 
away from the familiar organisation into faculties and is organised 
instead as a single integrated body con+sisting of eleven Schools 
and two Interdisciplin+ary Centres:

   The Schools of Behavioural Sciences, Bio+logical Sciences,     
   Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Economic and Financial Studies,      
   Education, English and Linguistics, History, Philosophy and      
   Politics, Law, Mathematics and Physics, Modern Languages;      
   and the Centre for En+vironmental and Urban Studies and the      
   Grad+uate School of Management.

The range of studies within these Schools covers the traditional
faculties of Arts, Eco+nomics (or Commerce), Education, Law and
Science. The fields of study and the degree pro+grams are listed in
the table on page 8.

On enrolment students register in one School and follow a
program approved by the Head of that School, but are able to add
to their main areas of study courses in other fields which may
be in other Schools.

<h> Courses and Credit Points </h>

An essential feature of the Macquarie system is the provision of
courses of differing length and workload, rather than fixed year-
long subject units. (Most Macquarie courses are of half-year
length.) Each course carries a credit-point value related to its
workload, and progress to gradua+tion is measured in terms of
accumulated credit points.

Class attendance is often only a small proportion of the total
workload for a course: tutorials, labor+atory, reading and research
in the library, writing assignments and study at home are all part
of the work involved. It is expected that one credit point in a
half-year course involves, on the average, four hours of work each
week in that half-year. Full-time students will normally take
courses totalling about 24 credit points in a year; part-time
students about 12 credit points.

<h> Academic Advising </h>

Each student is assigned an academic adviser drawn from the
teaching staff of the School in which the student is enrolled, and
is encouraged to discuss with this adviser any study problems that
may arise. The academic adviser is normally the first point of
contact for the student with a problem.

<h> Teaching Methods </h>

In its teaching methods Macquarie University aims to provide as
much contact as possible be+tween academic staff and students. Where
possible the tutorial rather than the general lec+ture is the basis
of teaching. Practical science work is carried out in small
laboratory units where groups of students work under a super+visor.

<h> External Programs </h>

The University offers external programs leading to the awards of
BA, BSc and BLegS. The range of courses available by external study
is limited. External teaching involves the use of study guides and
reading programs, audio tapes and the regular submission of written
assignments. Most external courses require attendance at short
intensive on-campus sessions normally held at the University.

<h> Advantages of the Macquarie System </h>

The advantages offered by the Macquarie sys+tem are:

 choice of emphasis in main area(s) of study;

&bullet; width and freedom of choice of secondary areas of study;

&bullet; opportunity for interdisciplinary programs combining two or more
  related fields;

&bullet; flexibility to change direction and still retain credit for
  courses already com+pleted;

&bullet; ability to take a relevant segment of study in another field
  without having to enrol in a comprehensive full-year course;

&bullet; opportunity (if desired) for intense special+isation at second-
  year and third-year levels.

<h> Postgraduate Study </h>

Students who have completed their undergrad+uate studies and
qualified for a degree may pro+ceed to graduate diploma programs
which are offered in ancient documentary studies, audiol+ogy,
business administration, children's litera+ture, computing,
development education, envi+ronmental studies, geoscience and urban
studies.

Higher degree programs (for Master's or PhD degrees) are offered in 
all Schools, and special vocational Master's programs are offered in 
the fields of accounting and financial management, applied finance, 
audiology, business administra+tion, clinical psychology,
computing, counsell+ing, economics, education, environmental
planning, environmental studies, geoscience, linguistics, mass
communication, migration studies, professional accounting, 
public man+agement, school counselling, special education, and 
urban studies.

<h> Non-degree Enrolment </h>

Persons who are not candidates for a degree may be permitted to
attend an undergraduate course provided that accommodation and
facili+ties are available and that the Head of the School in which
the course is provided considers that the person has an adequate
background to study the course. Applicants must be qualified for
matriculation status and be eligible for admis+sion as bachelor
degree candidates. The num+ber of places available for non-degree 
enrol+ment is limited and it may not be possible to accept all 
qualified applicants. Applications close with the Registrar, 
Macquarie University, on 1 October 1986.

<h> Continuing Education </h>

Macquarie University's Continuing Education Program consists of
a range of short, self-contained courses outside the University's
nor+mal undergraduate and postgraduate teaching programs. The program 
is in accord with the con+cept of a lifelong education and with the
Univer+sity's aim of maintaining a close relationship with the wider
community.

Courses in the program are of two kinds: pro+fessional
development or refresher courses intended to broaden or update the
knowledge of people working in a profession; and general interest
courses enabling people to pursue a personal interest in a subject
outside their normal vocation.

The courses vary considerably in length and time of offering to
suit different categories of par+ticipants Some are short,
intensive full-time courses; others are designed for part-time
students and involve a few hours' attendance each week throughout
an academic half-year, or full year.

<h> Fields of Undergraduate Study </h>

The table on p.8 summarises the fields of study in which students
enrolled in a degree program may major. The letters D, E and X in
the column following each field of study indicate that this
program is offered as a major study by day, eve+ning and external
courses, respectively. In addi+tion, individual courses in certain
other fields are offered in the evening or by external study, or
in mixed mode, that is partly by attendance on cam+pus and partly
by external study.

Only students who have been admitted to a Bachelor of Economics or 
a related program (BEc, BEc DipEd or BEc LLB) will be guaranteed a 
place in first-year courses in accounting. A quota of places in 
first-year accounting will be available for students who are not 
enrolled in a BEc or related program. Only students who have been 
admitted to a law program (BA LLB, BEc LLB, BSc LLB or BLegS) are 
permitted to under+take courses in law in their first year of 
enrol+ment. A small quota of places in first-year law courses is 
available to later-year students who are not enrolled in a law program.
Student entry to Computing Science I, which would lead to a major in 
Computing Science and Information Systems, may be restricted by quota.

<h> Bachelor of Arts </h>

The degree of Bachelor of Arts requires a minimum of three years
of full-time study (longer for part-time students). All fields of
study shown above are available for the BA. However, students in the
BA program who wish to include courses in accounting in their
program of studies must apply for one of the limited places for
students not enrolled in the BEc or a related program. Similarly,
students not enrolled in a law program who wish to include one or
more law courses in their program of studies must apply for one of
the limited places available. Such places are allo+cated on the
basis of academic merit.

The flexible structure of the BA program allows students to
develop programs made up of courses selected from the wide range
of fields of study available whether in the usual arts areas or
in science, social science or economics and finance. It is possible 
to undertake a major study in any of the fields listed. Thus
students can con+struct a program of study appropriate to their
interests and vocational aims.

To qualify for the BA degree a student must com+plete at least
68 credit points of which 38 must be gained in other than 100-level
(that is first-year) courses and at least 18 must be gained in other
than 100- or 200-level. A substantial and coherent area of study above
200-level must be completed.

<h> Bachelor of Economics </h>

The degree of Bachelor of Economics requires a minimum of three
years' full-time study (longer for part-time students). Fields of
study available in the School of Economic and Financial Studies for
the BEc degree are: economics, accounting and financial
management, actuarial studies and demography.

The emphasis in modern economics and busi+ness studies is
increasingly quantitative, and the courses offered by the School
reflect this emphasis. The BEc provides a basic qualifica+tion for
a variety of careers in the business and financial spheres, for
teachers, and for careers in the Public Service.

To qualify for the BEc degree students must complete at least
68 credit points, of which at least 38 must be above 100 level
(that is first-year) and at least 18 must be above 200 level
in courses designated for the BEc degree.

<h> Bachelor of Science </h>

The degree of Bachelor of Science requires three years of full-time
study (longer for part-time students). It is also available by
external study. The four science Schools are Biological Sciences,
Chemistry, Earth Sciences and Mathematics and Physics.

To qualify for the BSc degree students must complete about three-
quarters of the total of 68 credit points required in science
courses. Science courses are offered by the four science schools
and by the Centre for Environmental and Urban Studies. As well
there are courses in statistics, psychology, actuarial studies and
other fields which are designated as Science courses. The remaining
credit points required can be made up of other science courses or
humanities or social science courses.

The Macquarie School structure enables students to follow
expanding modern fields, such as chemical physics or geochemistry,
whilst gaining an appropriate knowledge of `classical' science.
Students who complete major studies in a particular subject, for 
example chemistry, may qualify for admission to the appropriate
professional institute.

Courses in Biological Sciences and Chemistry are not offered in the
evening and there is only a limited range of courses in Earth
Sciences and Mathematics and Physics available by evening study.
Consequently, students planning to under+take study in these
disciplines by part-time enrol+ment may need to consider enrolling
in the external science program or including some external courses
in their program. 

<h> Bachelor of Arts/Bachelor of Eco+nomics/Bachelor of Science with the
Diploma of Education </h>

Studies for the degree of Bachelor of Arts, Bach+elor of Economics 
or Bachelor of Science with the Diploma of Education are taken 
concurrently, normally over four years of full-time study or its 
part-time equivalent. Although the program may be undertaken on a part-time basis, many of the courses are offered only during the day.

</sample>
                                                                            


<sample><id> H27 </id>

<note> 2011 words </note>

<subsample><id> H27a </id>

<source> Vice-Chancellor's Report - 1985. The University of Melbourne
Gazette. </source>

<bl> by Professor David Caro, Vice-Chancellor </bl>

  To write about a single year is to capture merely a fragment
of University life - a host of dependent, but often unrelated
events. Of course, 1985 is no exception.
  Several events dominate - our research successes, the demand for
student places, the transfer of the RAAF Academy, and our
continuing efforts to meet new and pressing obligations
stemming from recent legislation on social issues.
  Overall the University can look back on its achievements during
1985 with satisfaction, even pride.
  The demand for University of Melbourne courses remained high.
Of the 15,000 applicants for places, we were able to take
3,500. The year also saw the introduction of the University's
special admissions scheme - for students who would not normally
gain entry under the existing selection procedures. One hundred
and forty students were admitted under the scheme, 82 from
Victorian high schools, 19 from Catholic schools, two from non-
Catholic independent schools, four from technical schools and
15 from technical and further education colleges.
  The special admissions scheme has been introduced on a three-
year trial basis to allow the University to evaluate selection
procedures. In selecting students, the University considered 
qualitative information such as school principals' recommendations,
internal school assessments and work experience.

<h> Anti-intellectual environment </h>
In a recent address the Minister for Science, Mr Barry Jones,
said "Australia is one of the few countries in the Western
World in which the words `academic' and `intellectual' are used
as terms of abuse." He is right, and I often wonder how long
we can afford that.
  Despite this anti-intellectual environment, the University of
Melbourne added to its international standing as a research
institution during 1985.
  The University signed a $140,000 contract to supply a proton-
microprobe to the Institute of Physics in Beijing, one of
China's leading research institutes. The microprobe, developed
in the University's School of Physics, is the most advanced
instrument of its type in the world.
  The `bionic ear', or cochlear implant, developed by Professor
Graeme Clark's research team at the Royal Victorian Eye and Ear
Hospital, and the bio-medical firm, Nucleus Limited, has
spawned sister companies to develop, market and sell the device
internationally.
  The University also established a microanalytical research
centre in the School of Physics, and with other institutions,
developed a key centre for statistics. The statistics centre,
one of seven centres of teaching and research funded by the
Commonwealth Government, was established with Monash and La
Trobe Universities and the Royal Melbourne Institute of
Technology.
  To help expand Australia's commercial activities in China and
Japan, the Faculty of Law launched an Asian Law Centre.
Initially the Centre will concentrate on Chinese and Japanese
Law, particularly in the area of trade and commerce. It will
initiate preliminary research on legal developments in Korea
and Hong Kong.
  An era came to an end on 31 December when the RAAF Academy
transferred from the University to the new Defence Forces
Academy in Canberra. The Academy's 24-year association with the
University has been a proud one - both in teaching and research.
It has graduated 35 students in physics each year during the
past few years.
  About 550 students of the RAAF Academy have been awarded the
Degree of Bachelor of Science including 50 with honours. Fifty
students have completed the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy and
30 the Master of Science. Approximately 500 publications have
resulted from research activities.
  During 1985 the University appointed an equal opportunity
officer, and approved policies on equal opportunity and on
combating sexual harassment. As well, the University made plans
to expand its childcare facilities. An additional centre
accommodating 60 children will be opened in Bouverie Street.
  Last year I reported the establishment of an Alumni Association
aimed at strengthening and working with existing graduate
organizations. Throughout the year alumni meetings were held
in Brisbane, Sydney, Perth and Canberra, and interest in the
University and its activities increased significantly. More
than 200 people attended the launching of the University of
Melbourne Gallery Society in June. The Society provides a means
for members to develop and extend their interest in the visual
arts through an active program of events.
  During the year the University was saddened by the deaths of
former Vice-Chancellors Sir David Derham and Sir George Paton;
Professor Emeritus Wilfred Prest, of Economics; Professor
Emeritus Victor Trikojus, of Biochemistry; and Deputy
Chancellor Dr Geoffrey Downes. All served the University with
distinction and will be greatly missed.

<h> Pressures on education </h>
The year's events have to be seen within the context of the
pressures on the whole education system. Universities have to
function in an environment beyond their own control - an
environment created by Commonwealth and State Governments.
  Whether we like it or not, universities are part of the
political scene. At times the education system suffers from
political compromises and from interaction between governments
- often without apparent rhyme or reason. It is a political
environment which can hamper intellectual pursuit in many ways.
  In so many aspects of University life we are hamstrung by
government regulation. The number of students, the way we seek
funds, and the type and, at times, quality of courses are
circumscribed by governments.
  On student numbers, for example, the University must follow
Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission edicts.
  The University would like to accept many more students, but
funding is not available at this stage. There is much talk of
increased participation and equality of opportunity but not
much is actually being done about it. When the Commonwealth
Government abolished tertiary fees, the change for universities
was profound. Since then there has been a single source of
income, not three sources as previously. To some extent this
hinders state and community objectives.
  When the change in funding took place, the Commonwealth
expenditure on education rose from four per cent of the budget
to 9.4 per cent in one year. Ever since, education has been
under attack by Treasury and the Department of Finance.
  Beset by more and more government regulation, by both the State
and the Commonwealth, the problem for Australian universities
in the past decade has been to survive and find ways to support
their proper functions despite the government strait-jacket.
  At present the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission is
undergoing a further change and it seems certain to increase
its intervention in university affairs. At the same time, the
Victorian universities are influenced by the Victorian Post-
Secondary Education Commission. While the Chairman of that 
body is most helpful to the universities, the Commission's 
Act would allow it to have a major impact on universities 
and it could, at any time, be in conflict with the Commonwealth.

<h> Giving education priority </h>
Of course, there are many problems - student numbers, funding
of places, re-introduction of fees, research funding, course
structure, institutional autonomy, the need to help
disadvantaged groups . . . But our most serious problem may be
in the way politicians and bureaucrats think about education.
Too often it is seen only as an expense without an immediate
economic return. It is an attitude which leads to debates about
preparing people for set tasks, cost-effectiveness, and
frustration as attempts to measure human potential defy
bureaucratic formulae.
  Now that the Commonwealth is funding higher education and, in
part, schools as well, the Federal education budget is around
$4,000 million a year. Unless this can be reduced significantly, 
education will be attacked in each budget. We need, therefore, 
to consider how higher education might be funded by means other 
than, or as well as by Commonwealth grants. However, the 
re-introduction of fees is just one issue.
  The time has come to give education priority in our national
thinking. One hesitates to advocate an education summit
meeting, but politicians and educators must begin to set common
goals for education. At the same time they must agree on the
best methods to achieve them.
  For our University there are some concerns but I am convinced
that with goodwill and good management the University of
Melbourne will continue to serve its communities - both locally
and internationally - with distinction.
  One of the greatest comforts for a Vice-Chancellor is the
knowledge that he can rely for support on the skills and
influence of a large and increasingly active body of graduates.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> H27b </id>

<source> The University of Melbourne Gazette Vol 42 No 3 </source>

<h> Classics detectives trace ancient Athenians </h>

<bl> By Frank Campbell </bl>

WHEN HONORATIANA POLYCHARMIS, a resident of Athens, who lived
in the 2nd century AD, claimed in a stone inscription that she
was descended from the statesman Perikles, who dominated
Athenian political life 600 years earlier, she may not have
been social climbing.
  Working from fragmentary stone inscriptions and literary
sources, Professor Michael Osborne, Professor of Classical
Studies at the University, has traced more than 200 relatives
of Perikles. The beginning of the family tree can be traced
back to the end of the 7th century BC.
  "It is just possible that Polycharmis was right," Professor
Osborne says. "If so, it would be interesting to know if her
family was as important in the 2nd Century AD as it was in the
5th Century BC, when Perikles flourished. We might know that
by the end of next year."
  Reconstruction of the Periklean family tree is a tiny part of
a major research program by Professor Osborne which could make
Melbourne University a world centre in ancient history
research.
  The aim of the research, which is being done in co-operation
with the British Academy, is to create a comprehensive
biographical dictionary of identifiable citizens and residents
of ancient Athens.
  Professor Osborne says at least 100,000 people (citizens,
slaves, criminals, and mercenaries) have been identified from
fragmentary stone inscriptions and literary sources.
Information about them is being fed into a computer and will
be published next year in two large works.
  One of the works - a lexicon of known Athenians - will be
published by Oxford University Press for the British Academy.
The second, which is to be published by Duckworth and
could run to 1200 pages, will be a comprehensive biographical
dictionary, containing information about the careers of each
of the 100,000 or so citizens and other residents of Athens
and an assessment of their importance in Athenian life. The two
books will serve as a reference source for scholars in ancient
history.
  Professor Osborne's main research is the reconstruction,
interpretation, and translation of the thousands of inscription
fragments, which have been recovered from archaeological
excavations over the past 200 years, and which are still being
discovered in considerable numbers. Many of them are in the
Epigraphical Museum in Athens. (Epigraphy is the study of
inscriptions).
  Some of the stones recovered from the excavations contain the
public records of ancient Athens. Professor Osborne plans to
publish the material for the years 336 BC to 50 BC with a 
translation and commentary, as "The Public Archive of 
Hellenistic Athens". The book will be illustrated by 
computer-drawn facsimiles of the stones and their inscriptions.
  "Reconstruction is a tricky task," he admits. "Most of the
stones are in very bad condition as the result of frequent re-
use since the original inscription."
  Professor Osborne explains that in ancient Athens anyone who
was a citizen had the right to vote at the Assembly. When the
Assembly reached a decision the Secretary of the Council was
instructed to see that the decision was inscribed on stone and
set up for everyone to see. "It was usually put in
a religious precinct, frequently on the Akropolis where, it
was believed, it had the protection of the appropriate god or
goddess," he says.
  "But later, when troubles affected Athens, many of the stones
were removed from the Akropolis, and, as time went by, were
used for a variety of purposes, some, for example, as rubble
for housing. Others were used as drain covers and building
material for fortifications. They became damaged and
fragmented. That's how we see them today."


The Department of Classical Studies at Melbourne University
has about 2000 impressions of these inscriptions. The
impressions, called `squeezes', are obtained by applying wet
filter paper to the surface of the stone inscription with a
brush. 

</subsample>

</sample>



<sample><id> H28 </id>

<note> 2007 </note>

<source> The Review, New South Wales Red Cross Society </source>

<subsample><id> H28a </id>

<source> The Review, New South Wales Red Cross Society </source>

<h> Travelling through Africa </h>

     1985 was truly an international year for the Australian Red
Cross Secretary General, Mr Leon Stubbings, as he explained to
New South Wales staff during a visit to the Division last
December.
     Mr Stubbings had visited a number of Societies in Africa
last year, as part of his campaign to become League President.
Although he was unsuccessful at the election, his visit to
sister societies, including Sudan, Libya, Mali*mali and
Mauritania was successful .
     "Mauritania was a hot, rugged country, with its Red
Crescent Society working with the League to take care of many
thousands of drought victims*vicims," Mr Stubbings said.
     "And to my fascination, Australian eucalyptus trees were
planted a mile out of Mauritania's capital city. The trees had
been planted as part of an attempt to stop the movement of the
sand dunes.
     "I also found this in several other African countries,
including Zimbabwe, Sudan, and Kenya.
     "The Australian eucalypts grow more quickly than normal
trees, hold sand, and are a quick growing fuel for cooking
pur+poses."
     Mr Stubbings said he would be approaching the Australian
Government on a project for sending gum trees to Africa.
     In Sudan, he visited a refugee camp about 35 miles from
the Eritrean Border.
     "The houses they're living in are terribly primitive, but
most of these people are nomads, and the housing they would
build for themselves "normally" would have been similar.
However, the health of these refugees is much better than in
the Ethiopian camps two or three years ago," he said.
     "The Sudan has a population of approximately 20 million
people, in an area the size of Western Australia. There are
more than 100 languages spoken in this country."
     In 1956, civil war erupted in Sudan between the Arab North
and the African South, which lasted for 17 years, in which time
ties with the west were broken.
     In 1976, Sudan improved relations with the west, and at
the same time, the League entered the country.
     The economy is based largely on agriculture, but only 20%
of the country is arable, and not all of this is being
cultivated. It is little wonder that droughts, often lasting
10 years in regions, have helped to cripple the country.
     At present, there are 80 delegates in the Sudan, being
sup+ported by the Red Crescent Branch.
     Food is distributed throughout the country by airbridge,
and by the use of camels.
     For 1986, over $AUS 19,152,500 (22,983,000 sf) is needed
for protection and tracing activities, dissemination of
information, medical supplies and relief, programme support and
administra+tion, aid to the national society. The major area
of spending is relief. This is food and goods to civilian
victims of conflict and drought, as well as seed and tools.
     "I also visited Zimbabwe with Red Cross workers,
travelling on roads `where trucks don't go'.
     "In Zimbabwe, there are about 300 volunteers in the
outback rural areas, helping handicapped people.
     "In one small town, there was a young boy of ten or so,
who was born with cerebral palsy. The village people did not
know what to do with him, and his often `crazed' behaviour led
them to tie him to a tree every day to control him.
     "The Zimbabwe Red Cross, which looks out for handicapped
children, were able to help the boy."
     Every week, a Red Cross volunteer nurse walks to the boy's
village, from her own, to check on the boy and his aged
grand+mother who is now caring for him.
     "Apart from the extraordinary work being done in those
countries, what impressed me most was how the ICRC, The League
and the National Societies worked together as the one Red
Cross."

</subsample>

<subsample><id> H28b </id>

<source> The Review - New South Wales Red Cross Society </source>

<h> RAIN, HAIL, BUT VERY LITTLE SUNSHINE </h>

     Following a tradition of four years, the Red Cross Calling
launch took place under rain laden clouds, but this year no one
minded as many of the crowd were already wet.
     The 1986 Red Cross Calling Appeal was launched at South
Maroubra Beach as part of the 1986 State Surf Life Saving
Cham+pionships. Mr Michael Cleary, Minister for Sport and
Recreation, and a member of the Surf Life Saving fraternity,
officially launched the appeal.
     Mr Cleary took the opportunity to thank Red Cross for its
work throughout the community, and to present the Chairman of
the Division, Dr David Storey, with a cheque on behalf of the
New South Wales Government, for $27,500.
     Organisers of the appeal chose to launch the Calling at
the beach to emphasise Red Cross' close association with Surf
Life Saving and first aid generally.
     For the past nine years, the Sydney Mobile Voluntary Aid
Detachment has provided first aid at the State championships.
     "We also supervise the first aid certification of members
of the Surf Life Saving Rescue Helicopter," said Mr John Smith,
Execu+tive Director.
     "We are proud of the work Red Cross does in sporting
events, and wanted to recognise Sydney Mobile for their
continu+ous work in the community in the name of Red Cross."
     Although final figures will not be available until June,
the 1986 Red Cross Calling Appeal looks to reach its target of
1 1/2 million.
     For many areas throughout New South Wales, this was the
first year that the Red Cross Calling took place. Tumut was one
such town which expects to rule off its books with a total of
$3,800.
     "This is a superb effort from such a small town,
especially when you consider it was its first year," said Mr
Graham Karp, Supervi+sor of Red Cross Calling.
     "The Calling was arranged by the Tumut Red Cross branch,
and the organisers are as thrilled as we are.
     "Two other towns which deserve a special mention are Yass,
which raised $1,300, and the tiny town of Bookham which raised
$500."
     Once again, the Calling was organised by the Red Cross
branch in each town, and it was the first time the Calling had
been held.
     At the 1985 Annual Conference, mention was made of the
"family to a street" approach, which had been operating then
for two years in Hunters Hill, in Sydney.
     "Sue Hoopman, the originator of the approach, used it
again this year in her area, and is expected to break the
current record of $10,000 by $1,000.
     Mrs Lambell, from the Gulargambone branch, and zone
repre+sentative, used this approach in Dubbo this year. Dubbo
did not hold a Calling last year and in previous year's had
raised in the vicinity of $2,000-$3,000.
     This year the area raised $5,500 by using the family to
a street approach. Families were organised to collect in their
own street, and reports are that all who took part had a most
enjoyable time.
     "Figures have shown that those areas which have used this
approach raised more money than in previous years."
     But perhaps the most outstanding success story is of three
young high school boys, two from Fairfield and one from
Strathfield. Each boy raised $1,000 on their own for the
Calling Appeal.
     "I feel confident that this has never occurred*occured
before", Mr Karp said. "It has restored my faith in human kind,
that three young people were willing to give up their time, and
work so hard."
     The Red Cross Calling Department is currently looking for
a special award to present to each of the boys for their
outstanding effort.

</subsample>

<note> SMALL ARTICLE OMITTED </note>

<subsample><id> H28c </id>

<source> The Review - New South Wales Red Cross Society </source>

<h> COLOMBIA VOLCANO </h>

All Divisions and National Headquarters have received funds
from the public for the Red Cross relief operation which
followed the tragic volcanic eruption of the "Nevado del Ruiz"
in Colombia in November 1985.
     The League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies has
worked with the Colombian Red Cross to provide relief to the
victims of the calamity.
     Detailed Situation Reports in telex format have been
circulated to all Divisions. They outline the nature of the Red
Cross relief action.
     The Australian Government contribution to the Red Cross
pro+gramme was $300,000. The Australian Red Cross has
transferred a further $177,455.19 received from the public and
$5,000 from the Society's Overseas Assistance budget item.
     Former Colombians now living in Australia have been
particu+larly active in fund-raising for Red Cross and the
enclosed photo+graph may be of interest for Divisional
publications. Pictured from left to right are Mr Alan McLean,
Assistant Secretary General, Australian Red Cross Society
receiving a cheque from Mrs Raphaela Lopez, President of the 
Spanish Latin American Welfare Centre and Mr Reynaldo Buitrago, 
President of the Col+ombian Community of Victoria.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> H28d </id>

<source> The Review - New South Wales Red Cross Soceity </source>

<h> FLOAT ON PEACE </h>

     The Nepean VAD cadets, winners of the Red Cross Lady
Cutler Cup, entered a float on the theme of Interna+tional Year
of Peace in the Australia Day procession through Penrith and
St Marys on Monday, January 27.

     The group has been entering a float in the procession for
the past eight years, and received a plaque for the best
decorated float last year. This year's float was decorated with
blue, red and white streamers coming down from a maypole and
circling the truck. A large dove, and peace symbols were also
part of the display, as well as maps of Australia. Director of
the Voluntary Aid Service Corps, Miss Phyl Jenkins, said the
cadet leaders, Mrs Jean Stephens, and Mrs Lorna Parr, and the
cadets put many hours of hard work into the float.

     "Although they didn't win anything this year, they are to
be commended for their community mindedness, and their hard
work," she said.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> H28e </id>

<source> The Review - New South Wales Red Cross Society </source>

<h> Smiles Raise $210,000 </h>

     Volunteers' smiles, and hard work raised over $210,000 on
Red Cross Button day last December, according to the Appeal
Supervisor, Miss Shirley Wood.
     "The volunteers did a terrific job, and we expect to be
receiving money from the Christmas Appeal Button Day for some
weeks yet.
     "It's not an easy job, standing on the street, selling
buttons to people who don't want to buy them, but the
volunteers always managed a smile, which I'm sure is what sells
the badges."
     Most volunteers who took part also held street stalls,
raffles and luncheons to raise money for the Divi+sion.
     "Red Cross services could not continue without the help
from people like this."
     The next Red Cross Button Day for the Winter Appeal, is
on Friday, June 6, and volunteers from coun+try and
metropolitan areas will be needed again.

</subsample>

<subsample><id> H28f </id>

<source> The Review (New South Wales Red Cross Society </source>

<h> Victorian Paddlers Raise $110-120,000 </h>

<bl> by TRACEY NORQUAY </bl>

WHAT involves 343 canoes, 552 paddlers, 3000 landcrews and
officials, hard work, and is expected to raise $110,000-
120,000? The answer is the Victorian Red Cross Division's
Murray River Canoe Marathon, which I "landcrewed" for.
     The Murray River Canoe Marathon, which has been held for
16 years, involves a 403 km paddle down the Murray River from
Yarrawonga to Swan Hill.
     This year's paddlers ranged in age from 16 years old (the
winners) to 60. The standard ranged from semi-professional
com+petitive paddlers to those in hire canoes, who probably
began "training" a few weeks before the event. Many were
ecstatic to have 30 seconds off the record and did not stop
racing all day, others just wanted to finish, and say "done
that".
     But for dedication, or sheer desire for punishment, the
paddlers shared equal place with the landcrews, and officials.
     The paddlers had to paddle an average of eight hours a
day, 92 km on the first day, 96 km on the second, 77 km on the
third day, 62 km on the fourth, and 76 km on the fifth, making
the total 403 kilometres.
     Landcrews had to rise at dawn, cook breakfast, pack up the
tents, drive along corrugated dusty roads to checkpoints, meet,
feed, encourage and massage paddlers, and set up camp in the
next town.
     The Marathon committee and officials, who included
starters and wakerupperers, organised the event, and made sure
that everything was running smoothly. Starters check boat
numbers from 6.30 am each day - check and double check that
each boat starts, and that they had life jackets, etc;
wakerupperers risk almighty abuse, as they drive through the
marathon camp each morning at around 5 am, with Morning Has
Broken, Always Look on the bright side of Life, and Wakey Wakey
Everybody, blaring over the loud speakers.

</subsample>

</sample>



<sample><id> H29 </id>

<note> 2013 </note>

<source> Power House museum director's report </source>

The task of creating a new museum on the scale of the Power
House is long, difficult and complex. Much of the Museum's
resources have been directed towards this exciting project.
Each year of its development witnesses significant advances,
new issues to resolve and greater confidence in the
project's ultimate success. The year 1985-86 was a crucial
one for the Museum - one of serious appraisal, some change
and a streamlining of practices and organisation.
An important development in 1985-86 has been a restructuring
of the organisation of the Museum to meet the needs of its
developmental projects. This program is now complete and
will remain until the Power House opens. The new structure
has been designed to make the Museum more responsive to the
needs of the project. It temporarily replaces the management
structure of curatorial and production departments. There
are now four divisions, each headed by an Assistant Director
responsible to the Director and Deputy Director. These
divisions are: Exhibitions; Community Services and
Marketing; Properties and Administration; and Space Theatre
and Observatory. These changes have distributed Museum
resources more efficiently, improved interdepartmental
communication, streamlined procedures and upgraded the
status of some activities, such as community services and
marketing. For this financial year, the Annual Report is
structured in line with this new organisation.
During the year the Museum has planned to create a number of
new permanent positions. These positions are for staff who
will be needed to continue Museum work after the Power House
project is complete. Significantly more permanent positions
will need to be created to fulfill the requirements of the
day-to-day running of the Museum from 1988.
In a time of tight budgetary constraint, the Public Service
Board has been reluctant to approve new permanent positions.
The Museum continues its efforts to keep demands on
Government funding to a minimum.
Construction and restoration of the Power House buildings
has progressed well, particularly in the first half of 1986.
Close working relationships have been established between
the Museum and the Public Works Department. This has had
tangible results in the rate of construction. By the end of
the financial year 11,000 cubic metres of concrete had been
poured for the buidings, glazing of the Harris Street
frontage had begun, cleaning the historic brickwork was
proceeding and roofing the new buildings was under way.
In December 1985, the Premier, the Hon Neville Wran,
announced that the Government would build a $11 million
space theatre in the grounds of the Power House. Cutbacks in
expenditure and changes in planning have meant, however,
that Government funding is no longer available for this
project. It is the Museum's view that the location of a
Space Theatre on site would be a major drawcard, increasing
the number of visitors while enhancing the science and
technology areas of the Power House.
The Power House will feature some 30 exhibitions. These have
been grouped into five broad themes: Creativity and
Australian Achievement; Everyday Life in Australia;
Decorative Arts; Bringing People Together; and Science,
Technology and People. The members of these groups are
responsible for the development of the exhibitions;
production departments service them. These include
conservation, registration, photography and community
services, audio visual, publications, production and
administration.
During the year a number of significant reviews were
instituted. These examined the project as a whole,
curatorial areas and individual exhibitions.
At the invitation of the Government, Dame Margaret Weston,
the then Director of the Science Museum, London, inspected
and reported on the Power House project in January 1986.
Dame Margaret approved the direction the project was taking.
However, she made a number of recommendations about what
could be achieved by 1988, where exhibitions would be best
located, and circulation paths within the Museum. Her
recommendations have been accepted by the Museum, and
incorporated into planning and design.
The Museum is reviewing the policies and development
strategies of a number of areas of the Museum's operations.
A committee has reviewed the Decorative Arts; another has
planned for Science and Technology; a third will review
Community Services and Marketing. These committees consist
of senior management within the Museum responsible for the
area being reviewed, and relevant experts and consultants
from tertiary institutions and the community.
The Decorative Arts Review Committee delivered its report in
March 1986. Its proposals have been broadly accepted by the
Trustees and its implementation is subject to proposals from
Museum management.
The Museum continues to examine exhibition storylines,
objects and presentation, among other things, to ensure that
each exhibition is coherent, interesting and accurate. 
During 1985-86 development of Power House exhibitions made
good progress. In early 1986 all reached the design
exhibition phase. Two are being designed in-house. Three are
being designed by consultants: Denton Corker Marshall,
Desmond Freeman and Associates and Neil Burley and
Associates. A Principal Design Consultant, Richard Johnson,
has also been appointed to oversee the design process.
Design drawings have been produced for each display and
detailed design work has begun.
Other specialist consultant services are also being engaged
by the Museum. Emery Vincent and Associates has been
appointed as Graphic Design Consultant, to work on all the
Power House's graphic design from the corporate plan to
signage and labels. Consultants have also been appointed for
lighting, acoustics and quantity surveying. Tenders have
also been received for a Communications Consultant, who will
advise the Museum on written communication with the public
to ensure that displays achieve a dialogue with visitors.
Temporary exhibitions mounted at Museum venues proved
popular with the public (and with critics).
At the Hyde Park Barracks, Settlers and Sydneysiders, an
exhibition of turn-of-the-century photographs, taken by the
Charles Kerry Studio was shown. This exhibition was
sponsored by The Bulletin and drew its images from an
extensive collection of glass-plate negatives taken by the
studio, donated to the Museum by Australian Consolidated
Press.
In the Australian fauna room at The Mint, there was a
display, Picture the Kangaroo, of children's books and
illustrations on the theme of the kangaroo.
At Sydney Observatory, in the newly restored west wing, a
temporary exhibition on Halley's comet was mounted between
December 1985 and April 1986. Forty seven thousand people
visited this exhibition. A new exhibition previewing the
Power House project was mounted in Stage I.
New temporary exhibitions of German Crafts, the Wellcome
collection from the Science Museum in London, and koalas in
children's books and illustrations, are planned for The Mint
and Hyde Park Barracks in the second half of 1986.
Exhibitions on contemporary Swedish design, and Rhoda Wager
and her school, will be mounted early in 1987.
The Museum was honoured in April 1986 by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers. This group made the Boulton
and Watt Rotative Beam Engine an International Landmark, an
award conferred on only half a dozen objects outside the
USA. The award is made for engineering artefacts of social
or historical importance. The Boulton and Watt was the third
rotative beam engine built, and it is the oldest to survive.
The Museum celebrated the engine's 200th birthday in July
1985.
Major acquisitions this year included the Tooth and Company
Limited Collection, a comprehensive collection of some 7,000
items relating to the history of brewing in New South Wales;
the Findlayson Collection of tin toys purchased with Patrons
Funds; the first official air ambulance; a Fairlight
computer musical instrument; a spectroscope; chairs made by
Sebel Australia and a bronze candleholder by Sir Bertram
Mackennal. These artefacts have been collected for display
in exhibitions in the Power House Museum.
It is, however, staff who make the Museum function; and on
them the Power House project depends. Their dedication and
hard work are invaluable.
All at the Museum look forward confidently to the future.
The new organisational structure and the processes of review
are providing the Museum with clear and far-sighted
policies, objectives and strategies, better management,
exhibitions and public services. Over the past year the
Museum's record has been very creditable. Several popular
temporary exhibitions have been held. Excellent acquisitions
have been made, and development of the Power House has
advanced considerably.
I am confident this progress will continue in the coming
year, extending the Museum's capacity to entertain,
enlighten and enthral. The standards the Museum has set will
be upheld, and at Sydney Observatory and the Power House we
will establish significant Museums of which New South Wales
can be very proud.


        <h> DIVISION OF COMMUNITY SERVICES AND MARKETING </h>

The appointment of an Assistant Director, Community Services
and Marketing in May 1986 brought together four previously
separate departments: Community Services, Publications,
Museum Shops and the Library. This consolidation places
community services and marketing functions firmly within the
senior management structure of the Museum, a positive step
towards ensuring the quality of visitor interaction with the
Museum's exhibitions.
The overall objectives of the Division are to ensure that
communication with visitors through exhibitions and related
programs is maximised and that their experience is
comfortable and enjoyable. The Division is committed to the
view that the Power House Museum's success lies in
delivering a lively, involving experience that will
encourage occasional visitors to return to the Museum
frequently. The establishment of a Division with this aim is
a first step in that direction.
The activities of the four departments are detailed below.
The new Division also has a group of Education Officers
responsible for Community Services input to the Power House
project. With barely 20 months to opening, the Division will
be concentrating on developing visitor programs,
publications and products related to the collections.
Consolidation of services provided to visitors at the
Museum's other venues will also take place.

<h> Community Services Department </h>

The purpose of this Department is to assist and encourage
people to make use of the Museum and in the process to raise
its profile in a positive sense in the community. To this
end we offer a comprehensive range of services and programs
designed to make optimum use of the Museum's resources in a
manner consistent with audience needs and Museum policy.

<h> Stage I </h>

Stage I was closed from September 1985 to late January 1986
to allow the removal of a large part of the previous
exhibition and the establishment of a new one. The closure
released a number of staff which provided an opportunity to
develop a series of talks about the Museum, its collections
and future development for schools and senior citizen
groups.

<h> The Mint and Hyde Park Barracks </h>

Regular, general and special tours were run for schools,
colleges, clubs, tourists and casual visitors by both paid
and voluntary guides. Two `community language' volunteer
guides were recruited to provide tours for visitors from
cultural minority groups. A number of new activity sheets
and teacher information leaflets were developed for formal
school programs. These were complemented by school holiday
programs including films, craft and recreational activities.
A ten-session Adult Education Course was developed in
conjunction with the Workers' Educational Association.
Events such as Heritage Week and Senior Citizens' Week were
marked by specially tailored programs.
Over the next twelve months community services at The Mint
and Barracks will be expanded, particularly in the area of
exhibition-related information for use by schools.

<h> Sydney Observatory </h>

Special brochures on Halley's Comet were produced for
visitors, including a Japanese language leaflet. From early
February the night viewing sessions for the public were
extended from four nights to six. From July 1986 these will
be increased again from one to two sessions per night. The
evening visits are very popular with bookings usually
required about six weeks ahead.
A broader public education program, including in-service
teacher seminars and practical workshops is being developed
for the fully-restored Observatory.

<h> Museum on the Move </h>

During the year Museum on the Move undertook two tours, one
to the Northern Rivers area, and one to the Riverina. 54,000
people saw the exhibition which deals with social change.
During September 1985 the train went to Wentworthville in
Sydney's west, and over a period of six days 6,000 people
visited the exhibition.
An education officer took up duties at the end of the year
to develop a new exhibition for Museum on the Move in 1988.

</sample>



<sample><id> H30 </id>

<note> 2001 words </note>

<source> CSIRO Laboratory News </source>

<h> Major advance in genetic engineering techniques </h>

CSIRO and Sydney University scientists have made a major advance towards
the development of genetically engineered vaccines for a wide range of human
and animal diseases.
  The scientists are using the new techniques to develop a vac+cine against
footrot, a major disease of sheep now costing Australian farmers about $60M
a year in losses and control measures. Footrot is a problem in many countries
including the US, New Zealand and the Soviet Union.
  The researchers believe the techniques, patented world-wide, could also
form the basis for vac+cines against other diseases in+cluding gonorrhea
and con+juctivitis.
  Minister for Science Barry Jones announced the vaccine development during
a visit to the CSIRO Division of Molecular Biology in Sydney.
  Mr Jones also announced an agreement between CSIRO, Sydney University
and two Australian companies, Biotech+nology Australia and Arthur Webster,
to produce the footrot vaccine.
  The agreement, negotiated by CSIRO's commercial company, Sirotech, involves
a two-year col+laborative research program aim+ed at the commercial
develop+ment of the vaccine against footrot.
  Mr Jones said a prototype footrot vaccine had been suc+cessfully produced
and tested by scientists from CSIRO's Divisions of Molecular Biology in
Sydney, Animal Health and Protein Chemistry in Melbourne and the University
of Sydney.
  "This research agreement in+cludes further refinement of the prototype
and the vaccine is ex+pected to be on the market within two years," he said.
  "Currently available footrot vaccines are very expensive to produce because
the footrot bacterium is slow growing, re+quires a particular environment
and oxygen-free conditions. These vaccines also contain at least eight
different strains of the bacterium and this adds to the production problems.
  In developing the genetically engineered vaccine, the scientists used
recombinant DNA methods to transfer a key gene from the footrot bacterium
into a less fastidious, fast growing bacterium.
  This gene controls the develop+ment of small hairs, known as fimbriae,
which are used by the bacteria to attach to animal or human tissue.
  The proteins that make up these hairs act as antigens, trig+gering the
defence system of the infected animal. Isolating these antigens is crucial
in the develop+ment of effective vaccines.
  A wide range of other bacteria used similar hairs to colonise host tissue
and the same techniques may be used to develop a vaccine against them.
  The researches are: Prof John Egerton, professor of Veterinary Clinical
Studies at Sydney University, who first established that it was feasible
to vaccinate sheep against footrot; Dr David Stewart of CSIRO's Division
of Animal Health, who first discovered that bacterial fimbriae were the
key antigens required for vaccination; Dr Neil McKern of CSIRO's Division
of Protein Chemistry, who determined the amino acid sequence of the fim+brial
protein; Dr John Mattick of CSIRO's Division of Molecular Biology, Dr Tom
Elleman of CSIRO's Division of Protein Chemistry, and Ms Beau Ander+son,
a CSIRO/Sydney University student, who collectively per+formed all the genetic
engineer+ing associated with the project.
  "Trials have shown the vaccine to be extremely effective and it is expected
to be relatively inexpen+sive to produce," Mr Jones said. 
  "Under the agreement, the two companies will provide tech+nologists and
financial support for commercial development and will jointly hold an exclusive
world-wide licence to produce and market a successful product.
  "If all goes as expected, this Australian high technology pro+duct will
find a ready world market. The research has been supported in part by the
Australian Wool Corporation and the Australian Meat and Livestock Research
and Develop+ment Corporation.
  "High hopes are held for genetically engineered vaccines and this is one
of the first to reach this advanced stage. And in the longer term the
techniques learnt here are expected to have much wider application.
  "This work represents a most important advance in vaccine technology and
confirms Australia's leading position in genetic engineering research.
  "Furthermore, we have made great strides in recent years to en+sure
Australian industry benefits from this growing scientific expertise."

<h> Hope ahead for osteo-arthritis sufferers </h>

Scientific collaborators in Sydney and Sweden believe they are well on the
way to developing a new class of drugs which would revolutionise the treatment
of osteo-arthritis, one of the most common diseases of old age, as well
as a range of other degenerative diseases of connective tissue. The drugs
could also aid the healing process after cartilage injuries.
  It is envisaged the treatment would also have wide application to
domesticated animals, especial+ly racehorses. In man and animals the principal
weight bear+ing joints, the knee and hip, as well as the spine, are the
areas most affected by osteo-arthritis.
  A grant of $50,000 plus $17,000 for equipment towards this year's research
in Sydney has come from the Swedish phar+maceutical company Pharmacia with
more anticipated in the future.
  Dr Peter Ghosh, director of the Raymond Purves Laboratory at Royal North
Shore Hospital (RNSH) and a member of the Department of Surgery (Ortho+paedic
and Traumatic), leads the Sydney team. A senior research biochemist with
Pharmacia at Upsala, Sweden, Dr Tony de Belder, will work at RNSH with Dr
Ghosh on the project until September. Dr Ghosh believes the grant may be
one of the first made in conjunction with the university which comes under
the new 150% tax concession category.

<h> Millions suffer </h>

  Osteo-arthritis causes suffering to millions throughout the world. Latest
figures show that about 86% of women and 78% of men over the age of 65 suffer
from it in some form. Other degenerative conditions are common, par+ticularly
injuries to the knee, hip and spine which frequently lead to pain and
incapacity. 
  The only drugs presently available in Australia to treat these conditions
are limited to those suppressing symptoms by alleviating pain, swelling
and the influx of inflammatory cells and their mediators: but they have
no ability to stimulate healing to aid the underlying problem. Among drugs
commonly used are aspirin, naprosyn and indocid and, in severe cases, cortosin.
  The new drugs, Dr Ghosh an+ticipates, would modify degenera+tion of joint
articular cartilage by suppressing enzymes and other mediators which, in
the pathological state "eat" the con+nective tissue or cartilage faster
than the tissue cell can replace it.
  "In healthy cartilage enzyme inhibitors are present which nor+mally block
these degradative processes," said Dr Ghosh, "but for some reason the levels
of these natural inhibitors is depress+ed in arthritis."
  Dr Ghosh and his team have isolated and purified, for the first time,
the natural inhibitors which suppress the destructive enzymes and they consider
that future therapy in this area may be based on replacing the inhibitors
lost from arthritic cartilage.
  Now that the native inhibitors have been characterised, DNA recombitant
techniques should allow them to be produced synthetically.
  A semi-synthetic molecule available in Europe and Japan, Arteparon, which
has a similar mechanism of action to the drugs currently under study, gives
cause for optimism in the drug project underway. Arteparon is not a pure
compound, however, but is an ill-defined mixture prepared by chemical
modicica+tion of calf cartilage extract.
  As it is difficult to define its structure, according to Dr Ghosh,
registration in Australia for human use has not been achieved. Nevertheless,
clinical trials with Arteparon in Ger+many undertaken since 1976 on more
than 5000 osteo-arthritic patients have shown a high degree of success.

<h> Excellent results </h>

  Of the 80% who experienced good results from the drug about 20% had excellent
results, some with remission. Of the 20% who received no benefits from
Arteparon, less than 1% ex+perienced side-effects, the main one being related
to anti-coagulant activity when the drug was injected directly into the joint.
  Dr Ghosh and colleagues con+sider the molecules they have so far developed
are superior to Arteparon. Moreover, they can be well-defined structurally.
  By correlating the biological activity of these new drugs with their
structure and conformation they are confident that new highly specific
anti-arthritic agents will emerge.

<h> NH&amp;MRC grants </h>

  Dr Ghosh has also received substantial grants from NH&amp;MRC for several
years for basic research on cartilage, its structure, function and meta+bolism.
This work provided the key to a better understanding of the connective tissues
which are found in knee joint minisci, ar+ticular cartilage, ligaments,
ten+dons and intervetebral discs. Their work has concentrated on articular
cartilage of the hip and knee, fibro-cartilage, or the miniscus, of the
knee joint, and intervertebral discs.
  In these areas, Dr Ghosh ex+plained, there are classes of en+zymes,
metallo-proteinases and serine proteinases, which in ab+normal conditions
degrade some of the principle matrix, or building blocks, of the connective
tissue. Normally these enzymes are latent but they can be trig+gered by
inflammatory mediators during injury or because of nutri+tional inadequacies
of the con+nective tissue cells.
  "Mature connective tissues are avascular, that is, they do not have their
own blood supply," said Dr Ghosh. "Normally building blocks or nutrients
such as oxygen, glucose, amino-acids and phosphates must traverse up to
three millimetres of tissue to get to the cartilage cells, or chon+docytes.
This renders them par+ticularly susceptible to events which interfere with
their nutrition.
  "In the case of the disc, injury, inflammation, or an inherited ab+normality
in the bone plate beneath the disc, can dramatical+ly influence the nutritional
pro+cess, often leading to cell death.
  "In response some of the cells then produce more lactic acid which makes
their environment more acid stimulating enzyme activity.
  "It was while investigating the activity of these enzymes and the ways
in which they could be con+trolled that the discovery was made about the
presence in human articular cartilage and discs of inhibitors which prevent
the enzymes from degrading the fundamental building blocks."
  In the course of his work Dr Ghosh and his colleagues have in+vestigated
21 drugs and their ef+fects on the cartilage. He has found that some used
to reduce inflammation and swelling, do not help the articular cartilage
itself and sometimes make it worse by suppressing the body's natural repair
mechanisms.

<h> Koalas threatened by lack of research </h>

  Ignorance is the biggest problem facing Australia's koala population -
ignorance of their health problems, their mortality rate and how they are
adapting to a changing environment through contact with human beings.
  "I expect their numbers are declining, but nobody knows for sure," says
Dr Paul Canfield, senior lecturer in the Department of Veterinary Pathology
at the University of Sydney and one of the few academics in Australia actively
involved in koala research.
  Supported by $5080 from the Sun Herald Koala Appeal Fund and $7500 from
the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Ser+vice, Dr Canfield is attempting
to discover what diseases koalas are susceptible to, and what causes them.
His work involves 40 to 50 post mortems on koalas each year.
  "We know so little about koalas we are not even sure what their normal
metabolism*metalbolism is," Dr Canfield says. "One of my tasks is to try
to establish normal haematological and biological parameters in order to
detect abnormalities."

<h>"Wet backside" </h>

  Urogenital and respiratory diseases are common findings in koalas examined
by Dr Canfield. The urogenital disease is also known as "wet backside" disease
and probably affects the fertility of infected koalas, throwing addi+tional
stress on population rates. Koalas also suffer from cancers and diseases
of the gastro+intestinal tract and liver, accor+ding to Dr Canfield's research.
  Dr Canfield has been conduc+ting research into koalas for more than six
years, and in that time has performed post mortems on about 130 of the animals.
  The dead koalas are sent to him by the Port Macquarie Koala Preservation
Society and by vets from the NSW North Coast and other areas. The Society
also takes blood for testing from both sick and apparently healthy koalas
so a fuller picture of the state of disease in koala popula+tions can be
formed.
  "A large percentage of the deaths of koalas are directly or in+directly
related to car accidents or from maulings by wild animals and domestic pets,"
Dr Canfield said.
  "But in about 20% of cases we can't find any tissue damage so we don't
know the cause of death. We just don't have the ade+quate information so
it is impossi+ble to reach a diagnosis."

<h> Varying success </h>

  Treatment of sick koalas is also in the infancy stage.

</sample>

</section>

   




