Forgive and forget?  

  RE  Nigel Jackson's letter (Forgive And Forget, 2/10), if it were not so
sad I could have laughed.
  As a little girl in England, the little Christian children constantly
reminded me that I had killed Jesus.  This was taught in Sunday school and
they didn't love me and they never forgave me.
  Wasn't I lucky not to have lived in Europe?  I might not have been here
to read Mr Jackson's plea to love and forgive my enemies as they have failed
to do after almost 2000 years.
 LILY GILD
Yokine, WA   

  THE attitude of "forgive and forget" Nazi war criminals overlooks the
vital point - justice.
  If large-scale and systematic atrocities are left unpunished then we are
saying that this behaviour is acceptable.  
  It is not the revenge of crimes committed that is the issue, but upholding
the moral code of justice which underlies Western societies.
 UNA BELL
Mundaring, WA Plague of 'wimmin' creatures 

  SIR - I am appalled that the Government is allowing ratbags and fringe
dwellers to camp on the lawns of Parliament House in this nation's capital.
 Is this the sort of image of Australians we wish to show the world?
 The sooner the Government invests in a water cannon and blasts these
creatures off the lawns and into Lake Burley Griffin the better. On second 
thoughts, the lake is already polluted enough.
  Maybe they ought to be ploughed into the lawn to help in its fertilisation
when it has to be replanted after the illegal encampment is removed.

 C.W.ALLEN Cremorne, NSW 


  THE plague of "wimmin" creatures which has infested the lawns outside
Parliament House is not a phenomenon which is unique to Australia.  Similar
outbreaks have occurred elsewhere in the Western world in recent years.
  What does, however, make the present pestilence different is that the
"wimmin" parasites are being sustained by Australian taxpayers through
the dole and supporting parents(?) benefits.
  They have even been given a grant by the Hawke Government to encourage
their disgraceful behaviour!
 
 J.K.McWILLIAM Bardon, Qld 

  I WAS disgusted to read about the campers at Parliament House.  What
hypocritical and degrading behaviour!  These are the "wimmin" who give women
a bad name.  I, for one, refuse to be identified with them in any way.

 M>FISCHER PerthAn artistic balancing act 

  PREMIER John Cain took the opportunity of the Premier's Literary Awards
to attack the Australia Council claiming that Sydney writers had an unfair
advantage over their Melbourne colleagues.  A strange line of argument
from a Victorian Premier who was presenting four of a total of five literary
awards to writers from outside his State.
  The presence of so many "out of State" writers among those in receipt
of these prestigious awards clearly demonstrates the fact that literary
merit is not channelled within State or civic boundaries whatever might
be the political requirements.
  As a contrasting example, more of the Literature Board's support for
publishing goes to publishers in Melbourne, reflecting that city's leading
role in this activity.
  Mr Cain's attacks on the council must now have something of a hollow ring,
particularly for Victorian writers.
  Considerable effort is made in all artforms to ensure a balance of members
are appointed from among the various States.
  Currently there are 15 members from Victoria among a total of 57 appointed
to the boards of the council.
  Victorian members thus comprise 26.3 per cent of all board members which
compares favourably with the State's national population proportion of
26.2 per cent.
  On a number of boards - Aboriginal Arts, Community Arts, Music and Visual
Arts - there are more members appointed from Victoria than NSW..
The assessment of Literature Board grants for 1985 and 1986 involved,
respectively, panels of 18 and 17 board members and external experts
including in each year five writers from Victoria.  On a population basis,
Victoria comprises 26 per cent of the national total; in both 1985 and 1986,
Victoria's representation on the panels was slightly above its national
population proportion.
  While an appropriate balance of State members is an important consideration
in the selection of assessment panels, other factors must be taken into
account in the final decisions on grants.
  These include national overview, gender balance, support for younger and
older writers and for different writing genres (from poetry to biography).
  These criteria must, of course, be satisfied within the overriding requirement
that work assessed must show literary merit.
  The Australia Council is proud of its record in balancing these diverse
factors in its pursuit of its national arts support programs.  The use
of peer group assessment panels, which bring together artists from across
the country, is a crucial mechanism to ensure that decisions on the allocation
of government support for the arts are free from regional, political or
other bias.

 DI YERBURY
General Manager 
Australia Council
North Sydney, NSWJob priority for married men 

  I AGREE with W. Hawke's statement (Briefs. 17/10) that married men should
be given priority in the workforce over married women who have a husband
on a good wage.  People say they work just to live, but one has only to
look into the trolleys at supermarkets to see the unnecessary junk food
piled high.  It is a crime when families are starving because a man cannot
get a job.

 MARY HILL
Lakemba, NSWNazi witch-hunt 

BEING of German extraction it makes me envious to see how good the Latvian
community stands up for itself against the Nazi witch-hunt and can only
hope the Germans do likewise.
  What is media reporting coming to when it can take hearsay and
unsubstantiated evidence as being historically true? Much of the so-called
evidence on war crimes has been proven not to be true by revisionists
and historians in the past.
  Where will Australia be in the future if all ethnic minorities bring their
grievances here and then expect Australians to be a multicultural society.

 REINHARD
ASCHENBRENNER
Upper Ferntree Gully, VicPlus factor 

  NICE things do happen in, through and because of the letters page, so take a
bow, Ed!

