Warm glow 

  ADMISSION to the goodly fellowship of the Briefs (23/10) has provided
me with a warm glow of satisfactory intensity and suggests that I should
not now further consider doing meself in (as currently fashionable for
us old parties) while there is hope of further bursting into print - with
other honourable mentions in despatches.
  As for dignity, in making one's exit from this vale of tears - perhaps
one could say that those of us oldies who have not had much of it while
they were here would perhaps not miss it so much in the outward passage.

 TOM FREEMAN
Croydon, Vic.Try `tax payers' 

  THE economic debate in this country would be a lot more meaningful if,
instead of using the word "government" when talking about spending, everyone
used the words "tax payers".
  In a democracy, governments derive their power and their funds from the
people and, like God, what the people give the people can take away - 
but the people had better do it soon, while there is time, since both 
our freedoms and our funds are being rapidly dissipated.

 G.R.RYAN
Taxpayers United
Mt Pleasant, WAID astonishment 

  The other day when applying for a new passport I submitted the required
authenticated new passport photos and statement regarding my identity, my
still valid passport, my original birth certificate and my certificate
of naturalisation
  To my astonishment this was not sufficient proof and I was asked to 
submit my credit cards!
  If credit cards are the definite proof of one's identity, then why issue
passports and other legal documents? In fact, why not save millions of 
dollars on ID cards and use Medicare and credit cards.

 P.R.ZEEMAN
Launceston, TasThe ABC way 

  I CAN'T agree with Greg Sheridan (25/10) that the ABC ignores conservative
points of view. I often hear far Left academics on Radio National expounding
at length on what (they think) conservatives such as the New Right are saying.
  Followed by expounding at even greater length on why listeners should
resist this growing evil and fight for truth, justice and the ABC way.

 PETER BONAR
Findon, SARort 1 

  S.C.HICKFORD (Letters, 27/10) may find the answer to his query on the
meaning of the word "rort" if he tries Chambers's Twentieth Century  
Dictionary .
  The meaning is certainly given in the New Mid-century Version, 1954 reprint,
under the entry "rorty".
  The entry, in full, is: rorty, ror'ti. adj. (slang) gay. -ns. rort (Austr.),
a racket; ror'ter (Austr.), a spiv.(Ety, dub.)
  The reason for the current popularity of the word is, of course, that
so many Australians have one going.

 IAN HOPE
Kelso, NSWRort 2 

  In answer to S.C.Hickford's query (Letters, 27/10) concerning the word
"rort"; this is Australian cant, circa 1910. Reference; Dictionary of Slang,
by Eric Partridge, 1969.
  The meaning - "A dodge, trick, scheme, racket". Hence "rorting, confidence
trickery".
  Sidney J. Baker (Australian Slang 1942) mentions rort as "a wild party;
ca 1930".
  I assume Mr Hickford is querying this word being used in a political sense.
In this case it would typify the tactics of all parties, especially those
of Labor.

 (Dr) NICK NICHOLS
Buderim, QldEntry note 

  YES, PM Gandhi, the last time I went to Britain I was made most unwelcome
at Heathrow Airport by a bearded Pakistani all dressed up in racist attire
and garlic who could not decipher my French ID card.
  So most obligingly I told him to take me to his Big White Master. Well
this Spike Milligan became very irate, but he did take me to what sounded like
the Under Secretary for Transportation and Deportation, who turned out
to be a big Irishman.
  Paddy was cross, too, but as he could read, he let me into Britain, which
was what I wanted in the first place as Spike was prepared to have me flown
back to Paris or Wagga Wagga.
  Next time, I shall land in Hastings, which is a safer place, especially
if one comes from Normandy.

 MARC de CHADBANNES
Beaudesert, QldSuch abuse 

  My wife regularly listens to parliamentary broadcasts and has attempted
to develop my interests in this area. 
  Having listened recently to the dual-sided hypocrisy following the death
of Mr Justice Murphy and the common language fight over the Queensland 
"cronyism" issue I wonder why my taxes support the salaries of such people
and why the ABC waste their efforts bringing such abuse of decency to air.

 R.F.HARRISON
Kambah, ACTThe lesson from 1975 

  SO Mr Whitlam has still not  learnt from the Day of Remembrance, 1975
(article by Errol Simper, 25/10) that the will of the people is paramount.
  The two protagonists, Messrs Whitlam and Fraser, had brought our country
to a state of non-government; according to our rules (Constitution), the
umpire blew the whistle to let us, the people, decide the matter. 
  Mr Whitlam considers that situation could not have developed in Britain
or in NSW. Whatever the situation in Britain would or would not be is quite
irrelevant - the UK has no constitution but many unwritten rules which require
honesty, integrity and responsiblity from politicians to make them work
- as I said, quite irrelevant; to hold up NSW as an example of political
jurisprudence ...
  Our Constitution was drawn up by apolitical wise men and has withstood
the test of time and the ravages of politicians. Its basic principle is
the very foundation of democracy - let the people decide. I hope one day
Mr Whitlam will realise, as constitutional historians will realise, that
that principle was applied on Remembrance Day, 1975.

 I.P.YOULES
Middleton, SAWelsh answer 

  MY sympathies to those who failed to win Indulgence Competition No. 60.
Word has it that Len had a Welsh friend staying with him at the time. "Is
there anything I can help you with, Boyo?" "Why, yes, you can judge this
competition if you like."
  And so he did, but he disqualified all those entries containing a `q'
as this letter doesn't appear in the Welsh alphabet.

 TERENCE V. DAVIES
Pymble, NSW 

