Time to work out how much return we get from costly arts subsidiesPETER ROBINSON 

FOR a nation which has a remarkably high public investment in subsidising
culture, Australia really is astonishingly fuzzy about what it wants to
achieve from it all.
  The continued upheavals in the ABC and the endless saga of Government
inquiries into subsidisation of the arts are just two surface manifestations
of what seems to be, not so much a cultural cringe, as a deeply abiding
faith in the divine right of cultural czars.
  That the nation needs more writers, singers, opera companies, rock stars,
ballet dancers, painters, ethnic performers, weavers, potters, television
shows, theatres and museums than it can achieve by means of public demand
is accepted without question.
  The usual solution is to throw more money at the problem; if money doesn't
work (surprisingly, it rarely does on its own), then throw some big-name
managers at it. If that fails, have a public inquiry, call out a street march
of eminent and experienced demonstrators and, as a last resort, get Mr Patrick
White to issue a statement on the issue.
  The truth is that the most remarkable expression of contemporary Australian
culture is the ceaseless, restless search for cultural enlightenment.
  Contained in that densely structured example of national theatre is an
exposure of all our characteristics, good and bad, and an interaction
of conflict that could not be matched for extravagant wastefulness by a
million big-spending movie directors.
  Take the example of the unfortunate Geoffrey Whitehead, a manager of
proven competence, an expert broadcaster, but, alas, a Pom. Not merely a
Pom, but a Pom who may well have been tainted by achieving some of his best
successes in Kiwiland.
  Even worse (could the slothful bureaucracy at the ABC imagine anything
worse?), he came in as a general manager imbued with the idea that his job
was to improve the style, efficiency and productiveness of ABC management.
  Poor Mr Whitehead. He didn't realise that the ABC is unmanageable, that
it is the cockeyed product of an uneasy and ever-shifting coalition between
political expediency and a vast range of self-interested, mostly mediocre
and long-established pressure groups. 
  Already the victim of a racial prejudice so strikingly vicious, it would
make Brisbane's welcome to a boatload of Vietnamese refugees look benign
by comparison, Geoffrey Whitehead also found himself up against virtually
every cultural pressure group in the country as well as most of its MPs.
  To top it all, he suddenly found he had a new chairman who also had a
yen to manage things.
  Following well-trodden paths, Government obviously decided that if one
hot shot manager couldn't keep the ABC in line, throw in another one.
  But typically, none of the people thrown in to make the ABC do what
Government wants it to do - not that hot shot of all shots, Sir Henry Bland,
not the plain speaking Leonie Kramer, not the unlamented Ken Myer, not Geoffrey
Whitehead and, one can be quite confident, not David Hill - has a real task
specification.
  The truth is there is no ABC boss who has the faintest idea of what the
target is. All they know is that they have to wage this continual war among
mutually exclusive objectives, trying to keep failures out of the press
and Government free from political fallout. Some objective!
  The same situation prevails in other taxpayer-supported cultural
institutions, from the Australia Council to the Australian War Memorial.
  No-one, least of all the Prime Minister and Cabinet, has done any
hard-headed, rigorous analysis of what all this expense is about. What is
it aimed at achieving?
  The money is not peanuts thrown to an organ grinder. Taking into account
the ABC, SBS, Australia Council, State subventions to the arts (the subsidies
to our elaborate State performing arts centres alone would not give you
much change out of $20 million a year), the tax deductibility of certain
donations to artistic enterprises, the book bounty, sporting subsidies (oh,
yes, sport is undeniably an important part of Australian culture) and so
on, I'd guess we are spending something of the order of $600 million a year
on subsidising cultural activities.

NOW the unassuming but quite hard-headed Leo McLeay, the Labor backbencher
who has chaired the latest inquiry into a national arts policy, is wondering
why more subsidies can't be given to pop music.
  If painters or sculptors with potential talent are subsidised to live
in great centres of culture like Venice or Paris, why shouldn't promising
pop stars be subsidised to sip from the industry's founts in Los Angeles
or London?
  Why not, indeed.
  After all, at least our successful rock stars contribute to improving
the nation's balance of payments, which is more than can be said of those
who practice many other categories of cultural endeavour.
  But Mr McLeay has put his finger on the nub of the issue. Where, in this
egalitarian land, does cultural subsidy stop? Who deserves subsidy and who
does not?
  Government had decided to abolish the independent SBS and merge it with
the ABC on the grounds that Australia cannot afford two publicly-funded
broadcasting systems.
  Yet the truth is that you could get nearly 10 national broadcasting networks
of the SBS's size for the price of one ABC. Which is the more  cost-effective?
  If the object of subsidising various forms of cultural endeavour is to
help the flowering of Australian talent, as Mr McLeay seems to imply, should
there not then be a firm dismissal from the public trough of those would-be
achievers who do not measure up?
  Why do we continue to subsidise mediocre writers, second-rate painters,
undistinguished opera companies, third-rate symphony orchestras, almost
ad infinitum.
  In many cases, the nature of subsidy itself (fair shares for all) is totally
counter-productive.
  We do not have good orchestras in Australia because they cannot afford
to pay decent wages to their players or attract first-rate, disturbingly
individualistic conductors.
  We do not pay decent wages because even in this freeloading environment,
there is only so much to go round; only so much largesse the taxpayer will
stand for. We spread it as thinly as possible; therefore, the result is
not excellence. It is the creation of jobs.
  Is that the object of the exercise? Perhaps it is. After all, successive
Australian Governments have been quite prepared to distort the entire character
of the nation's economic structure, encourage inefficient industry, place
enormous burdens on the consumer through tariff protection, all in the name
of employment creation.
  Why should cultural policy be any different?
  Probably, within the mixed-up porridge that constitutes the collective
mind of any government, there are innumerable motives and justifications,
many of them conflicting and none of them drawn into any coherent specification
as to what the large sums of money involved are supposed to achieve.
  David Hill, Donald Horne, Geoffrey Whitehead and so on are simply the
patsies. They are responsibility-takers, since no Government in its right
mind would want to take responsibility for what passes as cultural policy
in this country. 
  But is the issue really as intractable as all that? It is undeniable
that, what with subsidised accommodation for artists and pop-stars in the
world's highest rental cities, increasingly expensive sports
facilities, expanding ABC responsibilities in a world of technological change
and unbelievable improvements in the quality and availability of audio and
visual records, the whole scene has undergone drastic changes even since
the IAC conducted its arts inquiry 10 years ago.
  The kind of inquiry undertaken by Mr McLeay and his committee is mere
nibbling at the edges - a bit of salt to flavour up Government's
porridge-brain.
  Perhaps it is time that the very principle of public subsidy should be
given a thorough examination.
  This would be the other side of the taxation coin. Simplifying,
rationalising and improving the taxation system is all the rage just now.
  Mr Keating tells us that we need a much fairer tax system, one that is
less wasteful of national resources and one that encourages people to work
harder, save and do all those other good things that the nation is said
to need so much.
  Little is said about rationalising the other end of the process - the
spending of taxpayers' money.
  The volume and diversity of subsidisation in this country has got out
of hand and needs to be considered as a whole, with clear-cut, rational targets
in mind.
  People like David Hill and Geoffrey Whitehead would be much more gainfully
employed in looking into the purpose and effectiveness of subsidisation
than they ever will be in the disastrously dead-end jobs they now occupy.

