Verdict of world's financial markets will be critical to Budget's 
successGLENDA KORPORAAL 

AS Paul Keating prepares to read his fourth Budget speech to the House of
Representatives at 8 o'clock tonight he has one piece of good news - that
the world financial markets appear to have temporarily expended their doom
and gloom about the Australian economy.
  That is not to say they will not turn vicious again if the Government does
not deliver what is seen to be a tough and responsible Budget. But at least
the document is not being delivered in an atmosphere of irrational panic
of the kind which we have seen in recent months. 
  The news that the influential Barron's financial weekly (a paper which
maintains Clarence Barron's tradition of perceptive financial analysis with
a wry sense of humour) has delivered a cheerfully contrarian thumbs-up for
the Australian economy, and that the London market was moving back into
Australian bonds late last week, is important for the relatively small
Australian capital markets which so constantly take their lead from what
they perceive to be overseas sentiment.
  In this atmosphere it should mean that the Australian financial markets
- assured that the bears in London and New York are taking a quiet nap for
the week - can sensibly analyse what will be a very crucial Budget for the
Australian economy.
  It would be very easy to write off the almost neurotic preoccupation of
the domestic markets with the sentiments of investors in the major world
financial centres as being yet another example of the Great Australian Cultural
Cringe.
  But that is only partly true.
  The fact is that the sheer size of international markets is sufficient
for any major change in overseas sentiment to have a major impact in Australian
capital markets.
  It was the sheer flood of overseas speculative capital which came into
Australia in 1983 which eventually forced the Government to float the dollar.
And earlier this year, a bullish recommendation from the great American
bond trading house, Salomon Brothers of New York, was able to temporarily
reverse the steady slide in the Australian dollar.
  (It is no wonder that Salomon Brothers economists were enthusiastically
prescribing a good tightening of Australian monetary policy when the dollar
resumed its slide - one can only wonder what sort of phone calls the house
was getting from its US clients who had just sunk their hard-earned greenbacks
into Australian equities).
  The simple fact is that financial markets are now irreversibly
international, inescapably multinational.
  A combination of the floating of the world's major currencies in the early
1970s, the development of advanced communication and sophisticated 
telecommunications systems, cheaper air travel, the late 1970s push to recycle
the petrodollars, deregulation of financial markets and the subsequent
intense competition across the board in the capital markets - from banking to
investment banking and broking - has produced an international financial
system which players ignore at their peril.
  Corporate clients, particularly the well-courted Australian company
treasurers, now demand a full range of international financial services
from their bankers and financial advisers. And if they cannot get it from
one house they will shop around for another which can offer international
products.
 
  These days it is almost mandatory for anyone in the financial business to
have ready - that is, virtually real-time - access to sources of information
about overseas markets, and preferably informal or formal links with firms
in the world's major financial centres.
  
