<subsample>
	<id> B04b</id>
	


	<h> Battler's novel work-for-dole scheme</h>
	


	<source>Daily Telegraph - 19 September 1986</source>
	


	<bl> By MIKE SAFE on the Gold Coast</bl>
	

THE Gold Coast, with its long, lazy days in the sun, is the last place
to expect passion about the hottest topic of our time - working for the
dole.
  Its lifestyle - forgetting the high-rise moguls who make big dollars -
centres on having a good time.
  However, Noel Evans, 46, a small businessman, believes Australia's good
times have sunk like the summer sun over the Coast's rich hinterland, and
the shadows of recession are closing in.
  A former motel and restaurant owner, he once employed more than 30 people.
  He still has money to invest, ideas to launch and possibly profits to
make.
  But at the moment, he would rather lay low, living off his assets which
include land holdings built up over the years.
  He says while small businessmen - the real makers of wealth, the innovators
and creators of jobs - are forced into such a mood the nation will stay
in the doldrums.
  Mr Evans' complaints are common enough among the business community -
taxes and interest rates that are too high, profits too small, an economy
headed for recession and, despite all the political hot air, no immediate
answers.
  As it all winds down, not even the easy life on the Coast can console
him - he intends selling his house and heading back to Melbourne, his original
home, where new investment opportunities could be offering.
  Mr Evans says he is simply being a realist - not a cynic.
  And behind his hard-headed attitude, he expresses real concern for where
Australia is headed - and especially for the true victims, the unemployed.
  Out of this, he has formulated his own scheme which he believes will give
both job-seekers and the community paying their benefits a decent go.
  The scheme, which has been running about in his mind for months, involves
the controversial idea of working for the dole, but it enables the jobless
to have a say in the sort of work they do. 
  Mr Evans has given his plan the wordy title Let's Create Wealth And Give
The Jobless A Go.
  He says working for the dole schemes, as advocated by the hard-line New
Right, achieve little - no wealth is created and the unemployed are further
alienated by work that doesn't interest them.
 
         Ridiculous
  &quot;I think working for the dole is a damn good idea, but certainly not cleaning
the streets or Meals On Wheels, which in the end become ridiculous,&quot; he
says.
  &quot;You can only employ so many and you are going to have an army of people
running around trying to supervise it all.
  &quot;That sort of thing is non-productive for the country, and so I put together
this idea.&quot;
  This is how his plan would work:
  The Government would make it compulsory that to collect their benefits
the unemployed would have to do two days work a week.
  The two days would be at any business willing to take them on.
  On completion, the worker would be given a Government chit to be exchanged
for a cheque at a Government office, such as the CES or the Post Office.
  People working in productive industries, such as building or manufacturing,
would receive an extra payment from either the Government or the employer.
  If the work situation proved favourable, the two-day period might even
lead to a permanent job.
  Unemployed who tried to abuse the scheme by not being diligent would be
pin-pointed through a point score system that assessed attitude to be shown
on their pay chit.
  Unreasonable attitudes could mean suspension of benefits.
  Employers who tried to exploit the system - such as laying off workers
to replace them with what would in effect be free labour - would be banned
from the scheme and have their names published.
            
           Wealth
  The basis of the scheme would be creation of wealth by productivity while
giving training to the unemployed, who would be at liberty to change employers
until they found something that suited them.
  From this, business should be able to spend more, thereby boosting industry.
  Other benefits from the scheme would be:
  - Training in an occupation for those who may not have work experience.
  - Wealth creation for Australia because more people would be producing.
  - Less unemployment and lower taxes where there will be reward for effort.
  Mr Evans is under no illusion his scheme will have some magic result -
there will need to be an immense co-operative effort.
  &quot;It's like anything - if no one wants to co-operate, be it big business,
the Government or the unions, we can all go down the gurgler together,&quot;
he said.


</subsample>
