<subsample>
	<id> B05f</id>
	


	<source>Daily Telegraph  - 19 September 1986</source>
	


	<h> Less haste on judging the judges</h>
	

BOTH Attorney-General Terry Sheahan and Chief Justice Sir Laurence Street
have made it plain they do not want to become involved in a public slanging
match on the Judicial Commission issue.
  Unfortunately their exchanges have already embroiled them in an unprecedented
public debate.
  This has left the distinct impression that the entire situation has been
poorly handled.
  Mr Sheahan says he and his department have been working on the concept
of the Judicial Commission for 12 months.
  It therefore seems strange that the Chief Justice, and the legal profession
generally, only became fully aware of the Government's plans last week.
  It is ridiculous that the proposed legislation could reach the eve of
its introduction to Parliament and not have been considered by the profession
it will effect most.
  Mr Sheahan can hardly expect public confidence in legislation which has
been so roundly condemned for the indecent haste of its
introduction.
  Both the NSW Bar Association and the Law Society of NSW have now called
for the deferral of the legislation.
  They rightly point out that the first the profession learnt of the proposed
tribunal was by way of a press release on September 12.
  A copy of the first proposed draft bill of 31 pages was delivered to each
of their members two days ago.
  A copy of a second draft Bill of 32 pages was delivered today with a request
for comments to be made by tomorrow.
  Mr Sheahan*Sheehan and his department have been working on this important
reform for 12 months and then expect the legal profession to accept it in
24 hours.
  His argument that the haste was necessary because of the need to deal with
the special case of Judge Foord hardly holds water.
  Mr Sheahan yesterday admitted the allegations against Judge Foord could
be dealt with by special royal commission if State Cabinet rejected his
plans for the judicial commission.
  Proper consultation
  No one suggests that Cabinet reject the proposal out of hand.
  But there is definitely a case for the matter to be deferred and be given
the due consideration it deserves.
  It would also allow time for proper consultation across Macquarie St and
elsewhere.
  If that had occurred in the first place Mr Sheahan's reform would have
been introduced without the brawl that has errupted.
  We have had too many instances of laws, especially Federal, being introduced
in haste and amended in embarrassment.  It would be wise for State Cabinet
not to catch the disease.


</subsample>
