TIGHTENING UP THE P.S. 

THE PRIME Minister, Mr Hawke, put Commonwealth public servants on notice
yesterday that their future work practices would be much closer to those
in private enterprise. In a statement to Parliament on public-service reforms,
he said the Public Service reflected the management and work-style of the
"lucky" Australia of the 1960s and 1970s, but that the nation could no longer
afford that. Managers in commerce and industry were being urged to greater
efficiency to help get the nation out of the economic slump, and the same
applied to public-service managers.
  In a 15-page statement to Parliament, Mr Hawke announced a series of
measures, including the establishment of an Efficiency Scrutiny Unit to
oversee all public-service operations, a requirement for all departments
to reduce administrative expenses, redeployment or dismissal of redundant
and inefficient staff, and a review of flexitime. In addition, managers
will be given greater powers in staff promotions, and procedures are to
be simplified to reduce delays in filling vacancies. 
  Many public servants will feel aggrieved by Mr Hawke's statement, since,
as president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, he supported the
Whitlam Government's measures to make the Public Service a pacesetter for
working conditions and an example for private enterprise to follow. But
the present economic conditions demand that the Public Service look more
like commerce and industry rather than vice versa. However loudly the
public-service unions complain, there will be little sympathy for them
in the community, where many people have long wondered why public servants
are virtually safe from the sack, whatever their ability of performance.
  The Public Service will, if the reforms are effectively carried through,
no longer automatically provide a job for life in which the deadheads can
bide their time waiting for a generous superannuation interspersed with
long-servie leave and sick leave. The Public Service has too many people
known as "promotion barriers", occupying positions they have little interest
in and preventing the young hopefuls from gaining experience. A welcome
innovation announced by Mr Hawke is the abolition of appeals against promotions
above the Class 8 clerical level; for lower levels, the appeal process will
be streamlined. For too long the Public Service has endured long delays
and tedious appeals processes that have left senior positions vacant for
months.
  However, in the eagerness to streamline the promotion and appeal system
an important difference between the Public Service and private enterprise
must not be overlooked. Cronyism, personal preference, even religious and
political preference may be the prerogative of a private employer: after
all, the private employer pays the wages. But the public pays the wages
of public employees, and the public is entitled to a Public Service based
on merit alone. There is no place for political, religious or personal
preference in the Public Service, and the economies of any changes to the
promotion and appeal system must be weighed against the possibility of a
long-term erosion of the high tradition of a neutral Public Service.
  But economy and efficiency are important. Many people will applaud the
end of automatic higher-duties allowances for those temporarily in higher
positions. When a relatively senior person is placed on higher duties someone
sits in his or her chair on higher duties and there is a ripple effect all
the way down to the junior staff. Further, a person briefly in a higher
post does not carry the same responsibility as the long-term occupant, and
should not be paid as much.

More freedom for managers
  The higher-duties allowance should have been reviewed years ago. Also
long overdue is an end to the nonsense that a department has to spend its
budget outlay within a set year or risk a lower allocation the following
year. This has led to a rash of spending on interstate trips, publications
and other items towards the end of the year. Under the new arrangements,
money, within limits, can be carried over into the next financial year
and departments will have greater freedom in how they spend it. If the
Government wants public-service managers to act like private managers it
must give them greater freedom.
  The keen and energetic public servant will welcome the new measures but
he or she may be concerned about the operations of the proposed Efficiency
Scrutiny Unit, which will report direct to the Prime Minister. Despite
the promise that the scrutiny of departments will be co-operative ventures
between the unit and the departments, it would be wrong to assume that the
unit, to be partly staffed by outsiders, will be infallible.
  Mr Hawke's statement is deficient is several ways. The question of increasing
the efficiency and accountability of statutory authorities has been further
delayed while ministers consult the authorities. Despite previous promises
of reform, the statutory authorities have been left untouched.
  Mr Hawke announced a review of flexitime to end abuses. Many people believe
the Government should be able to restrict flexitime and prevent situations
that occur on the afternoon before a long weekend, when many offices are
almost unstaffed. But to abolish it altogether could be counter-productive;
not only through lost staff morale, but because flexible working hours can
result in efficiency. Not many in private enterprise work a strict nine-to-five
day. If they did, industry would suffer.
                     
