<subsample>
	<id> B08a</id>
	


	<source>The Age - 20 May 1986</source>
	


	<h> Keating rude, but also right</h>
	

FROM worry over a trade imbalance, the Federal Government has managed to
create a full-scale crisis of confidence in its unity, leadership ability
and hence the prospects for the economy. It has been a thoroughly unimpressive
performance by some senior ministers and the Prime Minister. So inept has
their handling of the matter been that attention now is focusing on the
so-called rift between Mr Hawke and Mr Keating, instead of on the balance
of payments and related economic problems. Instead of all debate being on
the most effective short and long term measures to turn the trade figures
around, the nation is being distracted (if not entertained) by the pathetic*bathetic
sight of a Prime Minister trying to run the country and protect his ego
from half way around the world and a Deputy Prime Minister who is able only
to wheel out the tired excuse that the media somehow got it all wrong.
  Let us put that notion to rest. It was the Treasurer who spoke of Australia
becoming a third-rate economy, possibly a banana republic, and who told
a press conference that the expanded Advisory Committee on Prices and Incomes
meeting in two weeks would be &quot;the most comprehensive discussion of issues
since the summit&quot; three years ago. The Industrial Relations Minister, Mr
Willis, raised the possibility of the Government telling the national wage
bench the outcome of the meeting. Mr Bowen said and did nothing to dispel
this view until Mr Hawke pulled the strings from China. Indeed, the Minister
for Industry, Technology and Commerce, Senator Button, reinforced Mr Keating's
line over the weekend with his speculation on the agenda for the meeting.
The message the media got on Friday was exactly the one Mr Keating and Mr
Willis wanted.

  It was, moreover, the proper message for them to be passing on. None of
the Government's squirming in any way diminishes the severity of the trade
imbalance. When a country is so reliant on mining and rural exports, and
its manufacturing sector is so underdeveloped that it cannot take advantage
of even a 30 per cent devaluation in the currency, there is cause for alarm.
Unless there is a concerted effort by governments, unions and business,
we can look forward to continued deterioration in our living standards until
world commodity prices pick up. There is no sign of that happening. The
volume of our rural exports, for example, is expected to drop three per
cent this year, and the value is expected to fall four per cent. Coking
coal volumes are static and prices are depressed or falling. Steaming coal
exports are likely to grow slightly, but prices have been kept low by the
oil slump. On the other hand, import prices are high because of the
devaluation, meaning our terms of trade are likely to remain bleak.
  However indelicate his words and methods might have been, Mr Keating was
on the right track last week with his warnings of economic misery and his
announcement of the special ACPI meeting. A shock was needed to focus attention
on the real structural problems inhibiting the nation's economic development.
That Mr Keating sent the dollar plummeting on world markets is regrettable
but, in the longer term, it might be a small price. That he made the PM
feel a bit left out is neither here nor there. Mr Keating took advantage
of bad economic news to convince the spending ministers and some of the
dimmer union officials of the need for restraint. He also served notice
on industry that important changes had to be made.
  The Government ought to proceed with the special meeting, while containing
expectations. It should not pretend it is just another routine get together.
The ACPI meeting should discuss the tax cuts, superannuation, and public
sector spending. It must also, as Mr Crean has said, consider industry
development policies and other measures to prevent a recurrence of the problem.
To its great credit, the ACTU is willing to negotiate delays to superannuation
and tax cuts. The meeting should seize on the ACTU's flexibility and lay
the groundwork for restraint in the Premiers' conference and Loan Council
meeting, and in the budget. In the longer term, there will need to be dramatic
improvements in productivity and innovation, and reduction in disputation
in manufacturing industry to restore some balance to the economy. If Mr
Keating's often flamboyant language can push governments, business and unions
in that direction, we would do better to applaud what he does than to blanch
at the way he does it.


</subsample>
