Let them go free 

It takes an extraordinary man and an extraordinarily worthy cause to bring
nearly a third of a million people out on to the streets of New York City.
Mr Anatoly Shcharansky, the Soviet Jew who survived 13 years of persecution
before being allowed to emigrate to Israel several months ago, is such a
man. His cause is the tragedy of up to 400,000 Jews who have asked for
permission to leave the Soviet Union and thereby fallen foul of the authorities.
To apply for an exit visa is an act of courage in itself for, more often
than not, it means instant loss of position in Soviet society. To be Jewish
in the Soviet Union, even for those who have no desire to leave, is to
experience a form of discrimination that is tolerated, indeed encouraged,
by the senior leadership in Moscow. Anti-semitism, usually in the guise of
anti-Zionism, is a part of life.
  Practising Jewish families are harassed. Conspicuously intelligent children
mysteriously fail to pass university entrance examinations. Innocent
individuals find themselves being convicted of crimes and sent to labor camps.
Yiddish is no longer allowed to be taught in Soviet schools. Hebrew fares even
worse. The disproportionately large Jewish contribution to Soviet art and
science is disregarded. Only by the very widest stretch of imagination could
most of those who wish to leave be termed dissidents. Most still simply want to
go to Israel, although a great many would rather go on to the United States.
But the message that Mr Shcharansky was trying to get across at his rally in
New York was that the refusniks have pathetically few opportunities for
publicising their plight in a closed and repressive society. Similar problems
are faced by any number of other ethnic or religious groups which find
themselves at odds with the Soviet system, including Armenians, Pentecostals,
Lithuanian Catholics, Ukrainian nationalists, Crimean Tartars, and individuals
who for various reasons find themselves in conflict with the state over issues
of conscience or principle. 
  Yet the Soviet Union is obliged by the Helsinki accords on human rights
to respect individual liberties, including the right to emigrate. The fact
that no attention is paid to this commitment, even by a new Politburo which
prides itself on a more open style of government, shows that the Soviet
Union remains morally moribund. It falls to governments, organisations and
individuals in the West to ensure that international attention remains
focused on the appalling lack of human rights in the Soviet Union. Seven
years ago, the Australian joint parliamentary committee on foreign affairs
and defence recommended the formation of a standing committee on human rights
to remind the Soviet Government of its obligations. The Federal Government
could set an excellent example by acting on that recommendation.

