<subsample>
	<id> B09b</id>
	


	<source>The Herald - 29-30 November 1986</source>
	


	<h> Still standing after bruising year</h>
	


	<bl> Derryn Hinch</bl>
	

So you thought you had a lousy year! I come to the end of another year on
Melbourne radio battered, financially bruised, but - to again quote from
Elton John - &quot;I'm still standing.&quot;
  It may also surprise some people that for me the end of 1986 looms closer
on an optimistic note.         
  Optimistic despite the fact that still hanging over me (awaiting a Supreme
Court Full Bench appeal decision) is a six-week jail sentence and a $25,000
fine for two contempt of court convictions.
  Optimistic despite the fact that I will go into 1987 appealing against
a sentence of 250 hours community service after a Magistrate's Court
conviction for naming a judge in a controversial rape-in-marriage case.
  Optimistic despite a four-day suspension without pay last week by a 3AW
management frightened of having its license to broadcast affected by a future
decision of an omnipotent and at times anti-journalist attitude of the
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal.
  (I had my say on that in the The Herald last week and won't rehash it
here.)
  Optimistic because basically, I guess, I AM an optimist. Cynical ... true.
Harsh at times ... true. A bull terrier (I'm told) on some issues ... true.
Disillusioned and disappointed sometimes .. true. Angry about, and often
despairing of, politicians ... true.
  And angry and emotional about the lack of funds, the lack of police, the
lack of counsellors, the lack of governmental and at times judicial
understanding about a cancer gnawing away at our society ... a plague called
child molesting

ON THAT I will not, and cannot, say more because of legal matters mentioned
above.
  Maybe it is naive to talk about optimism when you look back on 1986.
Both at home and abroad. It brought us political terrorism and a car bomb
in South Yarra.
  It brought the car bomb to the city during lunch-hour and a promising
policewoman, Angela Taylor, dux of her Police Academy class, had body and career
shattered.
  It brought us more Mad Max bullets. There and elsewhere we saw again the
poignant TV news pictures of policemen wounded.
  Bullets for men who were just doing their jobs - protecting you and me.
  It brought Australia international headlines that we expect to see from
other countries: the two words that make you cringe when put together -
the words &quot;Pope&quot; and &quot;assassin.&quot;
  (And if you need propping up when thinking of optimism then think of the
extraordinary bravery of the man in white who in Australia plunged into
crowds despite having felt the pain of a gunman's bullets in the past.)
  Internationally it was, tragically, bullets and bombs as usual.
  And near year's end we saw the twisted logic of President Reagan trying
to explain that by selling weapons to arch enemy Iran he - as a man of peace
- was trying to shorten the six-year Iran-Iraq*Irak war.
  On that basis, by selling them a cut-price H-bomb he could make a bid
for the next Nobel Peace Prize.
  The president kept insisting that selling weapons to Iran &quot;moderates&quot; through
Israel was a correct and proper foreign policy stance. 
  The fact that he announced the cancellation of the illegal deal after
he was found out didn't change his public stance.
  Neither did the sacrificial, scapegoating, dumping of two senior White
House advisers.
  Shades of Nixon and the exit of Haldeman and Ehrlichman as he tried to
cut off the tide of slime before it seeped under the door of the Oval Office
in the White House.
 
BACK home we had the protected parliamentary prognostications of Senator Howe
and the Minister of Social Security, start to sound hollow when more and more
dole cheats were flushed out. 
  Some got thousands of your dollars... and at least one went to jail for 
getting hundreds of thousands of dollars in a multiple identity scam. 
  Some people gasped when the National Times claimed last week that in a new
dole fraud crackdown social security investigators had found that one in five
people investigated were cheating - 20 per cent! 
  Forgive me if I say &quot;I told you so.&quot; 
  As you may know from my 3AW program... or earlier columns... when investigators
ran a check on single-parent benefit-claimers who had been getting deserted
wife benefits for seven years or more they discovered that 75 per cent were
cheating. And how does your P.A.Y.E. wage slip look this week? 
  We've had the disillusioning nurses' strike which has brought physical
suffering to patients, mental and physical suffering to 30,000 so-called
&quot;elective&quot; (read that non-emergency) surgery patients, doubts and trauma to
nurses who feel they are in a last-chance bunker fight and embarrassment to a
Labor government which inherited some of the problems but could have handled
this better. 
  We've had: 
- Paul Keating's dollar-plunging &quot;banana republic&quot; predictions. 
- The re-election of Joh, in his own right, despite the predictions. 
- The FBT and the poll evidence that Bob Hawke can not only no longer 
walk on water but that he and the Treasurer are stirring the mud at the
bottom of the pond. 
- And the inexorable decline of John Howard into the political quicksand called
the opinion poll while he and his sidekicks complain about the things that
Peacock's sidekicks are doing. They are the same familiar destabilising things
that Howard and his people did to Peacock. 

ANYHOW back to optimism. Taxes, direct and indirect are squeezing the middle
class. So are rates and other hidden charges.
  Pensioners get treated as if they hadn't spent 30, 40 or 50 years paying
taxes. They get told that a pension and some basic warmth and comfort in
your old age is not a right but a privilege in the lucky country.
  Nobody ever told them that on the election campaign trail. So why be
optimistic?  
  Because we have the potential for greatness. Not sabre-rattling world
power greatness. We are not, and will never be, &quot;a world power.&quot;
  But we have a chance, perhaps unique, to take moral positions and principled
positions and tell our enemies (and our friends) where we really stand
on mining uranium and South Africa and Star Wars and Afghanistan and socialised
medicine and the drug industry and corruption. 
  Just imagine how tall we would stand in the world if we were known as
THE country in the world which treated our old people at home or in hospital
better than any other country, East or West.
  Nice thought to end a year of columns with.
  P.S. Have a happy and meaningful time in the weeks ahead. And if you drink,
don't drive.

 
</subsample>
