<subsample>
	<id> B11e </id>
	


	<source> The Courier Mail - 21 May 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Not the right time for a rise </h>
	

  THERE is probably no right time for politicians to be given a wage rise,
but now is probably the worst possible time. Thanks to some alarming balance
of payments figures and some equally alarming statements by the Treasurer,
there is a grudging acceptance that the economy is in trouble and wage
restraint is necessary. But do the politicians think so?
  The inevitable row about politicians' increases should have been defused
slightly - had it not been for their cleverness last time. Then, they opted
to take increases in allowances rather than increases in salaries. The
logic of such a decision was inescapable; allowances were tax-free. Now,
of course, the politicians have been neatly caught in the fringe benefits
tax web and they are squealing long and loudly.
  It is difficult to sympathise with the politicians' plight. If the
Government votes to tax fringe benefits, then there is no good reason why
politicians should be excluded. Admittedly many spend heavily in their
electorates but they also enjoy subsidised meals and accommodation in Canberra
and Commonwealth car travel to and from airports. It is not the onerous
or demanding life that we are led to believe. The rewards are not too bad,
either.
  The Government backbench might very well be revolting on the taxation
of their allowances but so long as their Ministers persist with the taxation
plan, there is every reason why they should be treated the same as any other
wage or salary earner. Of course, if the Government backbenchers were really
serious in their opposition to the fringe benefit taxes, they could stage
a little Caucus revolt and force the Government to change its mind.
  The prospect of that happening is about as likely as the prospect of a
heatwave in Canberra next month. The backbenchers are stuck with the
consequences of an unpopular decision. They should grin and bear it, with
as much good humor as possible. After all, what a perfect opportunity to
demonstrate the restraint and reason they are so fond of prescribing for
others?


</subsample>
