Dilemma for rugby heavies  

  THE Australian Rugby Union should not accept the invitation to send a
Wallaby team to South Africa next year. No doubt the invitation is tempting
and the officials could easily argue a persuasive case for acceptance,
but the South African offer should be politely declined.
  There is no possibility of Federal Government approval for the tour.
The Sports Minister, Mr Brown, has already said the Government's opposition
to sporting links with South Africa will not change. Moreover, Caucus would
not let the Government get away with such a change; it would argue that Gleneagles Agreement does not allow official sporting contacts with
South Africa; it would point out, with much validity, that rugby supporters
are not Labor voters. Why then accommodate rugby officialdom? As well,
there is the threat posed to both the Commonwealth Games and Brisbane,s
bid for the 1992 Olympics.
  So much for the politics. The Australian Rugby Union is, however, entitled
to feel that the Government is applying different standards to different
sports. Individual sportsmen are free to compete in South Africa and trade
between the two countries is actively encouraged. As well, South African
rugby officials can point with some pride to the continuing desegregation
of the game. It is a great pity that the more vehement opponents of sporting
links  with South Africa cannot see the real progress that has been made
in both cricket and rugby. Sport breaks down more barriers than it builds.
  But Australian rugby officials should have reason for concern about the
prospect, horror of horrors, of rugby turning professional. As Kim Hughes
and his colleagues discovered, there is a lot of money to entice sportsmen
to South Africa.

Professional tours

  If South African rugby fans are deprived of official tours from the Wallabies
and the All Blacks and unofficial tours by current internationals in other
colors, it is extremely likely that they could see professional teams on
the tour circuit. The South African Rugby Union, as stubborn and unresiling
off the field as on, has already said as much. That would be the greatest
blow to the "game they play in heaven" since the breakaway of the Rugby
League.
  It will be easy for the Federal Government simply to refuse the Australian
Rugby Union's request for an official Wallaby team to tour. Despite what
the rugby officials might say, it will be difficult for the ARU to prevent
an unofficial team, however composed, from touring. Of all sportsmen,
rugby players are entitled to argue that they play their game for enjoyment
and no material reward. However, there is also the potential for huge financial
inducements to be offered to tourists. For the ARU, still basking in the
reflected pride of the 1984 Grand Slam Wallabies, the resulting furore
of such acceptances could not be faced with equanimity. 

 