STATE LEADERSHIP
ELECTION '86  

AS speculation increases that Premier Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen will retire
from politics or enter the federal arena, Daily Sun special writer MALCOLM
FARR concludes his two-part series on the men most likely to be our next
State Leader.

Credentials give Ahern a chance
  
MIKE AHERN can seem so alien in the National Party Cabinet that he sometimes
has to remind people he is a farmer, like many of his colleagues.
  He is Minister for Industry but his degree is in agricultural science.
  His home is the beach resort of Caloundra but his family roots remain
at Connemara, a property near Conondale.
  His Dutch-born wife, Andrea, would be considered an exotic on the CWA
circuit but she is a good mother and a hard-working political partner.
  Other factors make Mike Ahern stand out, not the least his height, age
(44) and Catholic faith.
  Most significant is the perception that he is a rebel - but not the type
to cross the House floor. 
  Because of this perception, Mr Ahern is often singled out as the man
who will take over from Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen and lead the way into a
high-tech era.
  Because he has been seen so long as a threat to the leadership, even if an
involuntary one, there has been friction, starting with Sir Joh and his
deputy, Bill Gunn.
  Mr Ahern's credentials are too good for him to be beyond suspicion: Federal
president of the Young Australian Country Party; party whip from 1972 to
1980; and a Minister at the age of 38.
  Although in full accord with many of the policies and actions of his
government, he is no puppet. 
  He has an intellectual and moral independence which, within the strict
discipline of the National Party, is close enough to being a rebel.
  Being reasonable is a prime element of his political style, but so is
being realistic.
  He has built his own network of business contacts in a process some party
elders might construe as the start of a power base.
  No doubt Mr Ahern, who won Landsborough in a 1968 by-election, would like
to be Premier.
  In 1982, he tried to become Deputy Premier but Mr Gunn pipped him.
  Mr Ahern would not want to be a fill-in party leader, as might be the
case for the man who follows Sir Joh. 
  But being deputy leader would be a good place to start the climb to the
top.
                         
