Austin cautiously aims for the top  

AFTER several months of trying, Brian Austin has not sold his Ascot house
and has been unable to find one with complete appeal in his new electorate
of Nicklin.
  His rented base during this election campaign has been a high-rise unit,
above the fray and removed from the clamor caused by his candidature.
  He has been particularly cautious in his assault on the new seat of Nicklin,
which in theory is a National Party enclave with a hefty 16-20 per cent
cushion of voters.
  The 43-year old Minister for Health is cautious about most matters,
including his ambition to become Premier.
  He has been tossing it about in his mind for more than a year, has discussed
it with friends and even sounded out reporters during occasional late nights
over beers and off the record.

Advice

  Mr Austin would not directly challenge Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen but has
cast his eye over the rest of the field.
  His leap, a few days after the 1983 election, from the Liberal Party to
the National Party was a calculated risk and with his ambition was hardly
incautious.
  He was able to stay in Government and maintain the prominent Health
portfolio. This was a good move as the Health Minister has two great
advantages. 
  He has departmental officers on whom he can rely for advice on technical
matters, and he can be the bearer of good news when he announces and opens
hospitals and other important facilities.
  He has backed his experts on all major issues, has used departmental
publications and advertising for some helpful personal publicity and is
regarded as one of the more effective ministers.
  But there is a portfolio better even than Health for an aspiring leader.
  The Minister for Works and Housing has an even greater ability to be
associated with good works and his duties take him around the State and
provide contact with a wide cross-section of voters.
  Mr Austin, along with other Cabinet members, has been interested in the
Works portfolio. It could not have escaped him that Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen
held it for five years before becoming Premier.
  A major problem intervened when his Brisbane seat of Wavell was abolished
in the recent redistribution and he needed another electorate.
  Some National Party members in Nicklin, the newly-created seat surrounding
Nambour, objected to party headquarters insisting on the Health Minister
ahead of hopeful locals. The matter has not been completely resolved and
is certain to have an effect on voters on polling day. 
  Should Mr Austin win the seat he would have an ideal electoral base which
would be rock-solid National for many years. 
  And should the job of Premier come up for grabs, he would be ready to
grab.
  He is still cautious and would not necessarily go into the contest alone
and might prefer to be part of a ticket. 

