<subsample>
	<id> B16h </id>
	


	<source>The West Australian - 14 July 1986</source>
	


	<h> Labor's test </h>
	

WITH the forces of moderation having triumphed at the Labor Party's national
conference, Australia is a lot better off than it might have been.
  The Government flew out of Hobart with a considerable achievement: Union
and party faith in the prices and incomes accord had been reaffirmed, the
ACTU had implied that it would entertain further wage discounting and the
Government's economic strategy had been resoundingly endorsed.
  But the story doesn't end there. The Government, despite the warm feeling
that the conference must have given it, knows that what happened in Hobart
was not the bottom line. It was a theatrical victory with the real battle still
to be fought.
  The test will come when the fine words spoken in Hobart have to be put
into action. Though both the ACTU president, Mr Simon Crean, and the senior
vice-president, Mr John MacBean, walked a long way down the path of brotherly
co-operation with the Government in Hobart, it is yet to be seen whether
they will be able to persuade the more tempestuous unions to accept further
restraint.
  The feeling is strong within the union movement that the philosophy of
restraint is being imposed principally on the workers and not on other sectors.
The new Hawke catch-cry of restraint with equity, and the emphasis repeatedly
placed on such things as price restraint, industry policy and the social
wage will convince hard-headed unions in the building, transport and metal
trades only if there is visible substance to match the rhetoric.
  There is no question, of course, that all members of the union movement
have responsibility to co-operate with the Government, just as industry does.
The country is approaching economic crisis-point, with an enormous trade
deficit and the possibility of having its international credit rating
downgraded. 
  In those circumstances there is no room for selfishness, bloodymindedness
or political grand-standing. As the next wage case approaches, the accord
will undergo its most severe test so far. Success or failure will determine
whether events in Hobart had a firm grounding in reality or were merely
a piece of empty symbolism staged by a Government about to lose its grip.


</subsample>
