Sydney
with Mark Thompson Fortune unclaimed  

  Forgetful Sydneysiders are sitting on a fortune worth $8 million through
unclaimed inheritances.
  Dozens of unclaimed wills - many involving more than $200,000 - are lying
dormant inside the vaults at the NSW Public Trust office.
  The office is given the unenviable task of trying to trace the hundreds
of beneficiaries who are in line to collect cash.  
  And the stumbling block is that nobody knows where they are ... or even
if they are dead.
  It seems as though Sydney folk are a trifle blase when it comes to checking
on those skeletons in the closet.
  And the heartache is that the money isn't kept longer than six years and
doesn't go to charity.
  Last year the Trust handed over $711,000 in unclaimed estates to the
Federal Government after failing to find the rightful claimants.

IF they are not squabbling about each other, NSW parliamentarians don't
seem happy unless they have some other bone of contention.
  They are currently embroiled in what to do with surplus committee funds.
  Some MPs want to spend the funds on a baby grand piano; others have expressed
an avid interest in an executives coffee machine. 
  But he three minutes needed to make a cup of cappuccino would cause chaos
in the dining room.
  Now one firm has come up with the solution and has offered Parliament
a free trial with a cappuccino unit that automatically sucks milk from
the container and delivers it, hot and frothy, directly into the cup.
  Just what aggressive parliamentarians need after one of their quiet,
eloquent little debates.

NSW butchers have declared war on the Health Department over the difference
between rib and sirloin steak.
  The long-running dispute centres on the last three ribs of the hindquarter
of a carcass of beef.
  The butchers say the ribs have traditionally been sold as sirloin, while
the remaining ribs are sold as rib steak.
  But the Health Department says only the thirteenth rib should be regarded
as sirloin beef.
  And as usual the entire dispute is over money.
  This week the butchers' case took a hard blow when one butcher was fined
$100 and ordered to pay $6000 costs over the issue.
  The Meat and Allied Trades Federation is now appealing against the decision,
but meanwhile it is telling butchers not to sell the ribs as sirloin steak.


NSW police vehicles are extremely versatile.
  It seems they are used more often to take officers to and from their homes
than in official patrols, according to a Government report.
  The NSW Public Accounts Committee has revealed that in some areas as few
as 30 per cent of police vehicles are actually used on any given day.
  The committee's report said many vehicles either sat idly at the back
of police stations or were taken home overnight by officers.
  The committee has ordered an immediate review into the Highway Patrol
and "performance indicators" should be devised to check on vehicle
effectiveness.
              
