<subsample>
	<id> B18a </id>
	


	<source> The Mercury - 21 October 1986 </source>
	


	<h> US statistics point to paradox in drugs fight </h>
	


	<bl> By Geoffrey Barker </bl>
	

WASHINGTON. - &quot;The Americans... frequently allow themselves to be borne away,
far beyond the bounds of reason, by a sudden passion or a hasty opinion
and sometimes gravely commit strange absurdities&quot;. Simon de Tocqueville,
Democracy in America (1835).
  Could the anti-drug hysteria now sweeping the United States be an example
of one of those &quot;strange absurdities&quot; observed by de Tocquevill 150 years
ago?
  In raising this question I am not suggesting that drugs are not a serious
social and economic threat to the United States; nor am I suggesting that
the US administration is necessarily over-reacting to the public demand
for action to combat the drug menace.
  But there is this paradox: the public outcry over drugs, and the political
response to it, is intensifying at the same time as the use of all illicit
drugs except cocaine is either stabilising or declining.
  And while it is true that the number of cocaine-related deaths has tripled
since 1981, Time magazine reports that more Americans (570) died from
appendicitis last year than from cocaine abuse (563). Furthermore the deaths,
suffering and economic costs related to illicit drug use remain minute compared
with those related to alcohol and tobacco abuse.
  So why are President Reagan and Mrs Reagan so heavily into the anti-drug
campaign? Why this rash of lurid articles that talk of &quot;Crisis&quot; and &quot;The
Enemy Within&quot;? Why the rush to extend testing for drugs through urine analysis?
Why the attempt (it failed) to legislate for the death penalty for drug-related
killings?
  Confronted by figures showing that one in every five Americans over the
age of 12 used one or more drugs in the past 12 months, worried Americans
now rate drug abuse as among the country's most important problems. For
many it is more important than unemployment and/or arms control.
  These concerns were magnified and reinforced by the deaths in June of
two prominent American athletes - University of Maryland basketball star
Les Bias and footballer Don Rogers. Horror stories about the effects of
the extremely addictive form of cocaine known as &quot;crack&quot; have generated
more anti-drug hysteria. 
  These developments have occurred against the background of a sustained
White House campaign on drugs. Last month President Reagan and Mrs Reagan
went on TV together to press their anti-drug campaign which Mrs Reagan has
taken to the nation's schools.
  At the same time President Reagan signed an executive order requiring
that Federal employees in &quot;sensitive&quot; jobs submit to urine tests. He,
Vice-President Bush, and 78 White House staffers set the example by submitting
to the tests which were immediately called &quot;jar wars&quot; by one amused sceptic.
  Following reports from Dr Carlton Turner, who heads the White House Drug
Abuse Policy Office, that drugs were costing the US economy more than $100
billion a year, some of America's biggest companies started insisting that
job applicants submit to urine analysis.
  And last week, caught up in the anti-drug mood, Congress came within an
ace of imposing the death penalty on drug-pushers whose customers died from
overdoses.
  Public fears have been confirmed and reinforced by scads of statistics:
nearly 6,000,000 Americans use cocaine at least monthly; 20 million use
marijuana once a month; 65 per cent of those entering the work force have
used illegal drugs.
  Small wonder, then, that massive national publicity was given to three
cases of children turning in their drug-using parents to the authorities.
Dr Turner said these cases showed (a) how much the children loved their
parents and (b) the emerging American attitude towards drugs.
  Perhaps he is right. But emerging American attitudes towards drugs seem
to have appeared more clearly in studies showing that, in fact, most drug
abuse is either stabilising or declining.
  While pointing out that drug use was still very high throughout the US,
the National Institute on Drug Abuse reported recently that the number of regular
marijuana users had declined from 20 million to 18.2 million between 1982
and 1985. Heroin use had stabilised at about 500,000 users - the same number
as 15 years ago.
  There had been a modest increase in the number of cocaine users, but a
strong perception that &quot;crack&quot; was extremely dangerous. Cocaine remained,
the institute said, the most addictive popular drug, but the number of &quot;current
users&quot; remained below 6,000,000.
  But subjective perceptions matter more than objective trends, and America
remains, as de Tocquevill said, &quot;borne away ... by a sudden passion&quot;.
  A clue to the reasons behind America's current concern about drugs may
lie in the country's history. In the late 19th century cocaine and opiate
drugs (basically heroin) were widely and legally used throughout the United
States to treat most aches and pains.
  They were outlawed by a tough act of Congress in 1914 after a 1910
Presidential report declared that cocaine was &quot;a vice&quot;, a &quot;creator of 
criminals&quot;, a substance that turned negroes into rapists.
  In the 1920s, in what was clearly one of de Tocqueville's &quot;strange
absurdities&quot;, the US imposed prohibition on alcohol - a &quot;noble experiment&quot;
that proved disastrous. Until the 1950s other illicit drugs remained marginal
and mostly restricted to marijuana.
  Then through the 1960s and 1970s, as attitudes to marijuana became more
liberal, there was an explosion in the use of drugs like LSD, and heroin
- and a revival in cocaine popularity.
  The devastating effects of these drugs - and their links to organised
crime originating outside the US - prompted a tough crack-down. Drug seizures
and arrests have increased sharply.
  Now, in the afternoon of the rigorously conservative Reagan era, the
United States is again moving away from tolerance of drug abuse. The
statistical trends are beside the point. National mood, national fear, is
the relevant consideration.
  The point, as usual, was well made by de Tocqueville in remarks immediately
after the epigram quoted above.
  &quot;In despotic states men do not know how to act because they are told nothing;
in democratic nations they often act at random because nothing is to be
left untold. The former do not know, the latter forget; and the chief features
of each picture are lost to them in bewilderment of details&quot;.
            

</subsample>
