<subsample>
	<id> B18b </id>
	


	<source> The Mercury - 3 December 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Iran scandal damage to President is serious </h>
	

 
	<bl> From GEOFFREY BARKER </bl>
	
	
WASHINGTON. - In a moment  of inspired verbal malevolence, Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan has said Ronald Reagan's presidency is &quot;tottering&quot; - a
word redolent of senility, uncertainty, absurdity.
  &quot;Tottering&quot; is, perhaps, an overstatement. But President Reagan has been
seriously and permanently damaged by disclosures that the US secretly
sold arms to Iran and that up to $30 million of the proceeds were skimmed
off for the benefit of the Nicaraguan Contra rebels.
  Now that the broad domestic and foreign policy consequences of the arms
scandal are painfully apparent, political attention is focusing increasingly
on three narrow questions of detail: (1) What happened? (2) Who did it?
(3) Who knew about it?
  The answers are still unclear, and are likely to remain unclear for some
time. But Congressional and media investigators are swarming over the events
to try to reconstruct the complex evolution of the scandal.
  So far they have provided only fragmentary glimpses into the murky world
of &quot;unconventional&quot; government activities, and into the amoral world of
international arms dealers.
  They are worlds of looking glass duplicity. One example: While one arm
of the US Government was secretly selling arms to Iran, another arm was
scheming (ultimately successfully) to trap 17 individuals doing the same
thing.
  They are the worlds of shadowy Israeli Government links to the White House,
of a luxury-loving multi-millionaire Saudi Arabian arms dealer, of retired
right-wing American generals running private anti-Sandinista crusades.
  And, inevitably, there are glimpses of the melodramatic apparatus of
clandestine government activity - the acquisition of &quot;safe&quot; houses in third
countries, the establishment of Swiss bank accounts, the shredding 
of sensitive papers. 
  Nobody is sure how all these tantalising pieces will finally stitch together,
but it is clear that the trail does not end at the door of Lieutenant-Colonel
Oliver North, the gung-ho Marine Corps war hero who was fired last week
from his job on the White House National Security Council.
  Lt-Col North and his boss, Admiral John Poindexter, who has resigned,
seem immediately responsible for having developed and executed the disastrous
scheme in an apparent effort to satisfy President Reagan's desires to (a)
win the release of American hostages held in the Lebanon, and (b) to assist
the Nicaraguan Contras despite a Congressional ban.
  But the origins of the scheme predate the secret trips to Tehran in May
and September this year by Lt-Col North and former National Security Adviser,
Robert McFarlane.
  For some years Israel has secretly sent arms to Iran, and US and Israeli
leaders have acknowledged that Israel helped facilitate the US deals with
Iran which reportedly began in August, 1985.
  The New York Times has reported that American investigators will ask
Israel for permission to interview four Israelis. They have been named
as David Kimche, former Director-General of the Israeli Foreign Ministry,
Al Schwimmer, a founder of the Israeli aircraft industry, Amiram Nir, the
Israeli Prime Minister's adviser on terrorism, and Yaacov Nimrodi, a
London-based arms dealer.
  Mr Nimrodi said yesterday he had helped to arrange one shipment of weapons
at the request of the Israeli Government, and that he had done so without
profit in efforts to help to secure the release of the US hostages.
  Associated with Messrs Nimrodi and Schwimmer has been the billionaire
Saudi Arabian arms dealer Adnan Khashoggi, who is reported to have told
guests at his birthday party in Marbella, Spain, in July last year that
he was coming up with a plan to free the hostages.
  Even before then, according to the Israelis, Mr Khashoggi in mid-1985
had contacted a Mr Manucher Ghorbanifar, an expatriate Iranian businessman
with ties to the Tehran regime. He reportedly put Mr Ghorbanifar in touch
with Mr Schwimmer and the talks, according to the New York Times, turned
to arms for hostages.
  Present at some of these meetings, at least, was a Mr Michael Ledeen,
a consultant to the US National Security Council who worked closely with
Lt-Col North in perhaps August last year Mr Kimche, then Director-General of
Israel's Foreign Ministry, met Mr McFarlane in Washington where arms for 
hostages were discussed.
  Yet in April this year, while these secret machinations were in train,
the US Customs Service revealed that it had charged 17 men - including Mr
Khashoggi's London lawyer Samuel Evans - with plotting to sell US weapons
to Iran. The men are due to go to trial on February 2 next year in New York,
but the US Government now says the case will be reviewed following the
disclosure that the Government had been doing the same thing.
  It is still uncertain how much US war material*materiel found its way to Iran,
or how it got there. According to President Reagan, everything would have
fitted into one cargo plane, and consisted of some 3,000 TOW anti-tank
missiles and spare parts for anti-aircraft batteries. The reported value
was some $12 million.
  But reports persist that at least 10,000 TOWs were sent and that the
the total value of the weapons was more than $1 billion. Most is reported to
have been flown in by Israelis, but there have been reports that Mr McFarlane
took some on his covert trips.
     

</subsample>
