Remarks relevant  

SIR, The CLP vice-president, Bill Forwood, suggests (Northern Territory
News, November 14) that my comments about CLP pre-selection proposals to
oust sitting members are irrelevant.
  Mr Forwood agrees that overall Government is a good and balanced team
and our main concern is to provide good government to the Northern Territory.
  The first step in doing this is to elect sufficient members to form
Government.  
  The second step is to have the members serve sufficient time to gain
experience and make a mature contribution.
  Branches consider primarily candidates they believe will win.
  They also take into account qualities that might enable members to achieve
high office.
  It is healthy to maintain a competitive environment for pre-selection.
  This normally occurs when sitting members retire and on the rare occasion
elected representatives fail to meet the requirements of the party or the
electorate.
  If the replacement of a sitting member is necessary because of the latter,
it should come after branches have had close communication with their local
member about the member's performance and shortcomings.
  If normal procedures are going to be changed to oust sitting members,
it would also be reasonable for the new pre-selection rules to be known
12 or 18 months in advance and not thrust upon branches and sitting members
while preselection is in progress.
  It is really a matter for the branches to pre-select or remove members
when this needs to be done; it is the branches who reflect the view of the
community that the member is expected to serve; it is the branches who
work hard on the ground to ensure that their member is elected; it is the
branch members who, in the interests of good government support the man
they have chosen to represent their area when the going gets tough.
  Without the branches there can be no good government.
  Given the Government is a good and well-balanced team, and the importance
of branch participation in the pre-selection process, any move by the CLP
Central Council to declare open season on one-third of the sitting members
raises serious questions.
  In this context my remarks are entirely relevant.

 Ian Tuxworth,
MLA for Barkley. Electoral danger  

SIR, In the continuing saga over why the ALP lost the Queensland State election
and the weeping and wailing that has followed the loss, the ALP has been
supported by Senator Janine Haines (Australian Democrats Leader) in calling
for Federal Government intervention into the Queensland electoral system.
  Senator Haines has obviously failed to consider the ramifications of
changes proposed by the ALP that would effectively eliminate the preferential
voting system, not only in Queensland but Australia-wide.
  With the introduction of a first-past-the-post voting system the electorate
would be polarised into two distinct groups, the supporters of socialism
and the free-thinking, free-enterprise anti-socialists.
  The major conservative parties would be forced into unity to defeat
the greatest enemy Australia has ever faced, the socio-communistic Australian
Labor Party and minor parties and splinter groups would cease to exist.
  Should that occur the rising tide of anti-socialist, anti-ALP feeling
that is sweeping the nation would ensure unity of purpose and the ALP would
face certain defeat.
  The predicament that faces Senator Haines in supporting ALP electoral
changes is two-fold: she is condemning the Australian Democrats to certain
extinction and she is inviting her own political demise.

 Syd Dart,
Garbutt, Q. It's all in the name  

SIR, On July 1, 1978, the title of "Chief Minister" was first used to describe
the leader of the Territory Government.
  Before this the leader of the majority party in the House was known, not
surprisingly, as "Majority Leader" and for a short while during 1977 as
"Chief Secretary" which probably was acceptable under the limited scope
of the NT Government then.
  After the enactment of the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978
with its attendant increase in powers and responsibilities, a more suitable
title for the head of the Territory's Administration was sought.
  The options were:
1. Prime Minister
2. Premier
3. Chief MInister.
  By (snivelling) elimination the advisers on such matters decided that
options 1 and 2 were usually associated with the heads of the Federal or
State Governments and that the Territory should not intrude upon the niceties
of these conventions.
  The "Chief MInister" tag was adopted.
  Since that lamentable decision, the title has in many ways set the Territory
Government apart from the other Governments of Australia, to the Territory's
detriment seen as the "new boy" with quasi-recognition.
  To hang this "some-sort" of identity on the elected Government's leader
was no more than an ill-thought-out attempt to appease Federal and State
politicians' egos by letting them see that the Territory admitted to being
subservient and not equal to the supremacy of the sovereignty of those
established governments.
  It was a forelocktugging, fawning, amblyopic, protocolic (sic) cringe,
a ratting on those who had supported and eagerly awaited Territory
self-government.  
  The title has been a boon for the cartoonists and derisive comment of
the political pundits of the media and was fundamental in causing a former
Chief Minister to describe himself as "King of the Kids". 
  Now that the declared intention of the Federal Treasurer and the policy
of the Federal Treasury is to treat the Territory financially as a State,
it is most opportune that our Government Leader should be seen as a "State"
leader at all levels.
  In future dealings with the Federal Government, the States or private
sector, I urge that the Territory Government do away with the inapt (to
me offensive) tag of "Chief Minister" and replace it with the far more
appropriate title "Premier of the Northern Territory".
  This overt positive and confident statement of identity and intent would
set on stream the move towards sovereign statehood of the Territory.

 Pete Lawrence,
Anula.  

