Barriers to reform  

SIR, Bill Goff's recognition of the way the Australian Constitution underpins
the existing industrial relations system in Australia and provides a barrier
to reform of that system ("Push by Right is turning full circle, Northern
Territory News, November 6) is very welcome.
  However, the implication that the Constitutional Commission stands for
preservation of the existing system is mistaken.
  Mr Goff quoted from the issues paper of the Constitutional Commission's
advisory committee on distribution of powers.
  That paper correctly makes the point that there are more constitutional
and institutional barriers to reform of the existing industrial relations
system than the critics of that system have acknowledged.
  Australia's industrial relations system is very much a product of the
existing Constitution.
  The Constitutional Commission is receiving submissions, including about
whether the existing Australian Constitution is appropriate to our industrial
relations requirements today and into the future.
  Submissions can be made to the commission at PO Box E2, St James, NSW,
2000.

 I.G. Cunliffe,
secretary,
Constitutional
Commission, Sydney. Water to cost more  

SIR, This Government has broken another promise.
  Your water bill is now being assessed in quite a different manner and
it could cost you a packet.
  Previously you had a basic allowance and if you did not exceed 500 kilolitres
you paid no extra.
  Now there is no basic allowance or charge.
  You pay 25c for every kilolitre used.
  I'm off to buy a water tank and get as much as God sends me, free.

 Stella Kirk,
Darwin. Wagait disgrace  

SIR, The Wagait decision on traditional ownership is unjust and a disgrace
to the Northern Land Council and Clyde Holding, the Federal Minister for
Aboriginal affairs.
  The full-blood people have every right to continue to seek a fair decision
in accordance with Australia's Lands Rights Act and not to accept a decision
which was made under such controversial circumstances.
  For the Northern Land Council to have this opposition from the very people
they are supposed to be advancing, points to the fact their decisions are
not as knowledgeable as we are led to believe or the Aborigines are not
as involved as they should be in the decision-making processes.
  Ten years ago the part-Aboriginal element had nothing to do with Aboriginal
tradition.
  Now they all seem to be experts.
  The NLC white staff are employed to make decisions informed as much as
possible, but on Wagait the white staff's recommendations were ignored
and vocal colored people overrode the true Aborigines.
  In the particular Wagait case even the council admits they do not have
any idea who originally had possession of this land. 
  They were asked to listen to oral reports from the contesting groups.
  This put the bush people at a disadvantage immediately as European debates
are not the Aboriginal way of making decisions.
  At Lake Bennett, a meeting was held two years ago.
  Wagait was discussed and finally all the full-bloods were asked to go
and sit down together and come to a decision.
  They agreed the Marranunggu people were the rightful Aboriginal owners
and delivered their decision to NLC members present.
  The NLC did not accept this decision and no reason was ever given why
they did not.
  If the NLC makes a decision no common person has a channel to contest
this unless he can produce finance on a large scale.
  Aboriginal people are worse off as they have not even the knowledge to
go about complaining as Europeans do.
  If NLC decisions are wrong, bad luck you cannot change it unless they
change their minds themselves.
  As a result of the Marranunggu people's fight for their land and this latest
revision of ownership and current decision, the NLC should take a look 
around Berrimah shops and Knuckey's Lagoon fringe camp where methylated
spirits is being used to console frustrations at their latest decision on
Wagait.
  Who are they trying to help, the Aboriginal people or the
Aboriginal-claiming conmen who are most vocal.

 Name and address
withheld by request.  

