If he lost, do we know he'd go?  

IN EVERY conventional election, defeat shadows governments and weighs heavily
on the shoulders of their leaders. Oppositions look taller, and even the
most abject opposition leader acquires at least some of the allure of power,
as the day comes nearer on which - if even only by electoral accident -
he might be elevated to power. This is not happening in Queensland. Why?
  Only part of the answer rests with the three-corneredness of the competition
- an extra, unhelpful, complexity that destroys the satisfying symmetry
of parliamentary elections. Nor is much of the answer to be found in the
decidedly limited appeal of the leaders of two corners - Warburton and Knox
- compared to that of Sir Joh of the Third Corner.
  No, the dreariness of this contest, the misery and even squalor of it,
has a different cause, at once attributable to Joh and traceable beyond
him to the dingy political traditions of Queensland. A case might be made
for the suspension of compulsory voting in this election, in order to allow
honourable people to avoid becoming accomplices in the corruption of suffrage.
  In two ways are voters disenfranchised in Queensland. The first is the direct
disenfranchisement that is caused by perhaps the most brazen gerrymander
anywhere in the parliamentary world. The zone system and the creative
map-drawing are so audaciously unfair that even their architect hardly cares to
defend them, beyond saying that Labor Governments did the same. When he was
asked last week whether it was an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, Sir Joh
replied: "Well yeah, fair enough." 
  The second disenfranchisement is more complex, though hardly more subtle:
it is the attrition of the value of each vote caused by the regime's campaign
of concealment, harrassment and pretence. On the Four Corners program last
week, Sir Joh gave what might be considered a definitive exposition of the
political bluff: a line of non-logical response that goes like this, "what
allegation? - you know it's false - who are you anyway"?
  A politician who renounces the responsibility to answer questions not
only scorns the electorate; he also diminishes its capacity to exercise
its right to vote. The Queensland electorate is impaired through lack of
knowledge; when it casts its votes (already distorted by gerrymander), it
does so in a fog of misinformation. Whatever the result, these elections
are flawed.
  That being so, it is interesting and useful to ask what outcome would
be needed to convince Sir Joh that he had not been re-elected. Mere failure
to attain a majority would not do the trick.
Would the swearing-in of another Premier be enough?
  One wonders, and it is not an idle thought. Sir Joh, in his thoughts,
is the saviour of Queensland. Those who fail to recognise this are, by
definition, enemies of the State. Why should he defer to them?
  That's where you get, once you allow a politician to acquire delusions
of sanctity.

 ROBERT HAUPT  

