<subsample>
	<id> B20b </id>
	


	<source> National Times on Sunday  - 21 December 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Christmas all the year round </h>
	

  THIRTY years ago, if you lost something of value - a ring or a fountain
pen - in the street there was a good chance you would get it back. These
days, the probability is high that you wouldn't. It is no secret that Australia
has changed. We have come to know growth and unprecedented personal wealth,
and the people who know the latter best have also, of course, accrued power
and influence. Our role models, even heroes, these days are Bond and Holmes
a Court, Murdoch and Packer - Australians (most of them) out of Dallas.
  In the 1950s we most admired Test batsmen who walked long before the umpire
lifted his finger. Pragmatism, ruthlessness, unflinching competitiveness
are the rules of today's game, which promises big prizes to its winners.
Whereas the 50s demanded that we co-operated with one another for little
reward, the 80s have seen whole sections of society become an irrelevance
to many social and political processes.
  Who asks the poor what they think or how they vote? A growing minority,
their voice is nonetheless small amid the cacophony of persuasion that
harangues our opinion-makers and political leaders. Who asks the family
man or woman - people who were typical Australians not so long ago - whether
he or she is satisfied? Nobody. Not seriously, anyway, because in modern
times what is left of the family is often a broken body hinged together
by the State and supported by welfare payments. Better to listen to the
real beat of society, to hear the people who know its savage rules and can
play its cut-throat games.
  So where does this leave Christmas? Families still reunite, gifts get
exchanged, turkeys are carved and plum pudding is slept off in the recliner
rocker. Marvellous things all. And for a week or two around the event a
miracle occurs: the goodwill is palpable, the spirit of Christmas lives.

  But a week or two of goodness is all, it seems, we can afford. For it can be
argued that one of the casualties of Australia's development in recent decades
has been basic decency. And that is perhaps the greatest pity of all. It is
less important that professing Christians are fewer these days. Christianity's
fundamental message seems an encumbrance to modern life. Yet what a message!
There is not a doubt in the wide world that the meaning of Christ's life is
more relevant than ever, that in the long run it is better to love than to
destroy and that the rewards for doing so are far more profound than money in
the bank. 

  The OECD has forecast an Australian GDP growth rate next year of 3.25
per cent - a handy figure at the best of times and greater than the average
for member countries of 3 per cent. Assuming continued steadiness in government
policies and commonsense management and union reactions to them, there is
every reason to believe our economy is not so fragile as we thought. There
will be cake to go around. If only it could be Christmas every day, say
the dreamers. If only the baby in the manger, the self-sacrifice on a knotty
cross, were lasting images.
  Too much to ask? perhaps, but if we can make the effort to accommodate
the views of the person on the other side of the table - even if it stings
(and it has never been easy to walk before the umpire gives you out) -
then we could celebrate a kind of Christmas all year round.


</subsample>
