Malcolm, you seem more human now  

JOHN HOWARD is entirely wrong when he says that Malcolm Fraser's night
on the town in Memphis is no laughing matter. That's exactly  what it is
- no more (unless you believe the theory about South African agents out
to sabotage our Eminent Person) and certainly no less. What are we supposed
to do, confronted with this bizarre story of drink, drugs and trousers?
Put our hands over our ears?
  Australia, in fact, did entirely the opposite and the story took off like
wildfire. There was an almost palpable improvement in the national mood,
as the story took over from our preoccupation with fringe benefits, inflation
and the dollar. People in our neck of the woods - the media - have a
particularly fine appreciation of a good story. And the Memphis incident
is the story of the decade.
  Why? Well, for one thing it involves the high and mighty brought low,
and that's a delicious theme, above all in Australia. Then there is the
seediness of the locale: whatever the true reputation of the Admiral Benbow
hotel, it is no place for an Eminent Person. And to add to all that, there
is the element no really good story can do without: mystery.
  It will be appallingly unfair to Malcolm Fraser if indeed he was slipped
a mickey finn, since that story - the "poisoned ice-cube" theory of aberrant
behaviour - has been around since the day the first grape was fermented.
Dorothy Parker, feeling poorly, blamed a piece of celery from the night
before. True, she allowed, the celery was surrounded by a bloody mary at
the time, and preceded by a procession of brandies and soda that took half
an hour to pass a given point. But it was the celery that did it.
  Most of all, we love the story because it concerns Malcolm Fraser. When
he was Prime Minister he seemed to thrive on being aloof. Unloved and
unloveable, he lectured us on our shortcomings and reminded us of what life
was not meant to be. Patrick Cook, our cartoonist, once drew him on a
psychiatrist's couch, being asked to say the first word that came into his
mind. "Rectitude!" declared Malcolm, and that seemed to sum him up.
  Now we've seen another Malcolm Fraser, and if it's not one we ought to
admire, at least it's one we can more readily sympathise with. Perhaps if
he'd shown us a little more of his human side, we might have been more
forgiving of his prime ministership. But then again, now that we have the
Leader Who Weeps, Malcolm's stiff upper lip doesn't seem so bad.
  Bob Hawke, of course, suffered a hotel robbery, too - the Boulevard Hotel
affair about which he is uncharacteristically reticent. Bob can't use the
one powerful argument Malcolm has on his side in all this: that anyone exposed
to the American Mid-West talk circuit can be expected to go a bit strange.
  There is no romance in places like Memphis, St. Louis or Nashville, despite
all the songs. They are fast-food cities, hollow at the centre. When he
went for a late drink in Beale Street, he found the one genuine thing in
Memphis: the blues.

 ROBERT HAUPT  

