Some hope at last in crime fight  

EVER since this State was founded by a ragged collection of convicts
and soldiers, citizens have been confronted with jarring reports of corruption
in high places and crime bosses running around with apparent immunity.
  Tales abound of crooked cops, taped telephone calls, rigged trials, bent
judges, ministers on trial, hit-men and drugs, police and politicians'
friendliness with the Mr Bigs of crime.
  Human nature being what it is, there will always be a few rotten apples
to spoil the barrel. But the fact remains that the administration of justice
in the elevated realms of NSW for many years has been pursued with somewhat
less vigour than in some other places.
  Anger and frustration at times have been spawned in many  people. Regrettably
only a few still feel this way. A far worse social disease is disillusionment
and apathy.
  Yet the reports this newspaper carries today offer a glimmer of hope that
perhaps, at last, something is moving.                                  

  Much of this depends on the fortitude of the Police Minister, George Paciullo.
Mr Paciullo has achieved something unique in his 10 months in the portfolio. He
has won the confidence of the police like no other minister and it appears his
pledge to take on the Mr Bigs of crime is not just hollow words. 
 
  Mr Paciullo has shown he responds to public complaints, is prepared to
name the guilty in Parliament and weed out corrupt police even though he has
received death threats.
  He has been kept on in one of the most crucial jobs in the NSW Cabinet by
Premier Barrie Unsworth. Mr Unsworth may well be somewhat lacking in
charisma, he may be regarded as humourless and deadpan, but on the question of
crime and corruption he has one of the best track records in Parliament. Since
1977, when his 20-year-old son Anthony died from an alleged drug overdose in
Malaysia, Mr Unsworth has vowed to pursue organised crime. 
  He has been accused of being a headkicker, a man who pulls wings off
butterflies. Perhaps this, and not slick charisma, is what it takes to pry open
the can of worms and sort out the mess inside. 

