A fine job, Mr Premier  

MR UNSWORTH has had an ill-starred start to his premiership, so it's pleasant
to be able to offer him congratulations on the comprehensive, sensible and
overdue changes to the system of justice in NSW.

The Attorney-General, Mr Sheahan, joined the Premier in announcing the
overhaul, but Mr Unsworth's will was clearly discernible in persuading Cabinet
to support the measures. Following on the decision to deny the casino contract
to the Hooker/Harrah's consortium, the establishment of a series of new
judicial bodies indicates a new and firm will to boost public confidence
in the State Government's attitude on moral and ethical issues.

The new Judicial Commission will be charged with offering guidance to judges
and magistrates on consistent sentencing. Its conduct division will deal
with all complaints about the behaviour of judges and magistrates and it
will have the powers of a royal commission, which will be exercised for
the first time in an inquiry into the conduct of John Foord.

The establishment of the post of State Director of Public Prosecutions is
ironic, in the light of what the former Premier, Mr N.K. Wran, had to say
about the federal holder of this post, Mr Ian Temby QC. But to pass 
responsibility for higher court prosecutions out of political hands makes
good sense. In particular, there is much to like about the decision that
the new DPP will adjudicate on no-bill issues, the cases in which the
authorities decide to take no further action.

  MR Sheahan, a man of good sense, will feel no regret at the passing of
that poisoned chalice. Some of the traditional diehards, who like to arrange
many matters out of public sight, may feel the decision is naive, but this
is more a measure of their cynicism than of public benefit.

The Opposition talks of "knee-jerk reactions". Well, they would, wouldn't
they? And there are some criticisms and arguments among the legal fraternity
about the detail of some of the new arrangements. The new scheme of things
is complex and some amendments might be made with advantage. But generally
the response among concerned citizens and organisations has been warm.

The Chief Justice, Sir Laurence Street, carries heavy responsibility in
the new system. He will have the good wishes and encouragement of many people
previously sceptical and bitter.

As for Mr Unsworth, if he continues to build public confidence in State
institutions and systems, he may yet find the public opinion polls playing
sweet music for him.
    
