<subsample>
	<id> B21e </id>
	



	<source> The Sun-Herald - 3 August 1986 </source>
	


	<h> The ghost of Murphy </h>
	

IT IS the Australian convention that judges' private lives should be not
only discreet but unobserved. Yet Justice Lionel Murphy has not only lived
publicly these past two years but now, it seems, he is to die publicly as
well.
The force of will which has driven Justice Murphy back to the High Court
bench may be founded on courage (as his friends insist) or on obsession
(as his enemies assert). Which is immaterial. What matters is that he has
returned, that his brother judges have permitted him to return and that
the position of Chief Justice Sir Harry Gibbs, as a result, is both difficult
and controversial. 
To the Chief Justice, nearing retirement and deeply worried about the future
of our highest court, it is wrong that a judge should sit while his conduct
is under investigation.
To Justice Murphy, the right of a High Court judge to sit until removed
by Parliament is clear and now reinforced by his own conduct last Friday.
Even many legal authorities worried by some aspects of Justice Murphy's
conduct agree that the right so carefully inserted in the Constitution at
the behest of the great Sir Isaac Isaacs is beyond question and above
convention.
For its part, the Government has backed Justice Murphy this time around
and shrugged off Sir Harry Gibbs's misgivings. But so many questions remain
unanswered that even from the grave the ghost of Lionel Murphy will haunt
both his old party and his old court.
The continued functioning of the Parliamentary Commission now seems pointless.
Hounding a dying man would be unseemly. But the provision of answers to
those questions, questions which could even place Sir Harry Gibbs's own
position in jeopardy, is essential.
Was the High Court threatening to strike back in May if Justice Murphy resumed
his seat? Or was it only Sir Harry Gibbs and perhaps one other? Why did the
Government agree to the setting up of the Commission? If Murphy could not
be seated then, why can he be seated now with Government support?

Whatever the answers, the Chief Justice must now be deeply regretful he
ever took the court into politics, because that is what he did in the early
days of May. And former members of the Whitlam Government must now be rueful
about that fated decision to put a politician on to the High Court bench,
just as the more thoughtful members of the last Menzies Government came
to rue the sending of Sir Garfield Barwick, then Foreign Minister, to the
court. 


</subsample>
