We must not forget prisons ...  

  The State Government has begun its new term with a burst of activity -
revolutionising trading hours and planning space stations.
  But it is also obvious it has neglected two long-standing blights on the
community as revealed by Sir David Longland's inquiry into the prison system
and the Sturgess Report on sexual exploitation of young people.
  The State Government cannot totally shrug off all responsibility for the
latest riots at Brisbane's Boggo Rd Jail.
  The behavior of the prisoners cannot be excused and the ringleaders must
be identified and punished.
  But it is obvious the outbreaks of destruction and violence have underlying
causes that have been publicly identified and which have not been corrected.
  Senior figures in the State Government are obviously of the view - and
shared by many electors - that there are no votes to be won from prison
reform or enlightened treatment of criminals.
  But that alone is not an excuse for the continuation of practices and
conditions that have been the breeding ground of repeated disturbances.
 The fundamental problem within the State's prison system is the lack of
adequate accommodation.
  Prisoners have, in fact, been kept in police lock-ups on a long-term basis,
while in the jails there is serious overcrowding.
  The Government has acknowledged some of the problems, both by introducing
alternatives to prison sentences and planning new jails.
  But it has been a case of too little, too late.
  Last year's report of the inquiry by Sir David Longland into the State's
prison system also revealed a wide range of other inadequacies, ranging
from poorly qualified and trained staff and management to allegations of
corruption and drug use within jails.
  More than half the prisoners in Brisbane Jail had no work allotted to
them. They spent their days behind a wire mesh fence in a concrete yard      
half the size of a tennis court.
  The new Prisons Minister, Don Neal, has had a baptism of fire like his
predecessor Geoff Muntz.
  Both he and Premier Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen have indicated they will take
a hard line with those involved in the riot.
  That is a justifiable attitude but more fundamental and thorough-going
changes to Queensland's prison system also will have to be implemented if
the scenes of Friday night are not to be repeated.

... and vice

  Many people a year ago said when the Sturgess Report was tabled in
Parliament: "Of course, nothing will happen despite all the recommendations."
 The sad fact is, the cynics have been proved correct.
  Mr Sturgess, a man much respected for his knowledge of the law, said police
had the power to put massage parlor proprietors out of business.
  Not only are parlors still thriving but this week 13 escort agencies openly
touted for staff, in Mr Sturgess's words: "Attempting to procure for
prostitution." 
  Mr Sturgess fears victims will often be young girls on the run and needing
cash.
  As well as lack of action in dealing with criminals, none of Mr Sturgess's
recommendations for law reform has passed into the statute book.
                      
