<subsample>
	<id> B23d </id>
	


	<source> The Sunday Sun - 28 September 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Stamp out the rip-off temptation </h>
	

  The idea of a public accounts committee as an ever-alert watch-dog able
to instantly sniff out the misuse of public money is attractive to voters.
  We will hear much support for the establishment of such a Queensland
committee from the Liberal and Labor parties during the coming election.
  It is certainly true that the handling of public funds in some areas of
the Government services in the State in recent times has left much to
be desired.
  But electors not familiar with the operations of public accounts committees
in other States and at Federal level should not be misled into believing that
such a move here would, with a stroke, correct the present problems.
  The simple fact is that public accounts committees as established elsewhere
operate after funds have been misused - and after that offence has been
detected by the Auditor-General.
  Their operations almost inevitably amount, in a real sense, to shutting
the stable door after the horse has bolted.
  The committees are made up of politicians who for all their other virtues
are not often skilled accountants or lawyers who can unravel complex frauds.
  They are most often confronted in their inquiries by trained bureaucrats
who are anxious and determined to protect both the reputation of their
departments and their independence from outside intrusion.
  And it has never been within the charter of such committees to reach
a view on whether public money has been wisely allocated or prudently spent.
  It is simply to establish whether the money has been handled within the
bounds of proper Treasury procedure.
  As some notable inquiries have shown, departmental officials are as likely
as not to get into trouble with a public accounts committee for being too
frugal and not spending all funds allocated to them.
  The philosophy underlying such criticisms is that some other Government
area would have been only too happy to dish it out.
  For all their inadequacies, however, public accounts committees serve
a number of useful purposes - and it is difficult to understand the implacable
opposition of the Premier, Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen, to the establishment
of such a body here.
  But it should not be thought that all problems would then be solved.
  The debate should be widened and expert advice sought on methods for
the earlier detection of sloppy systems that allow a tiny minority of dishonest
public servants to try to rip off the system and the taxpayers' dollars.


</subsample>
