YOUR LINE
Hodgman not `minister for exemptions'  

VINCENT MAHON won't like me refuting his good story (Sunday Tasmanian Your
Line 12-10-86) with facts, but the record should be put straight concerning
my responsibility as Minister for the Environment.

- I have not exempted GHD Planner West from using sandstone cladding on
the International Hotel. Sandstone cladding was never proposed.
- I have not exemted Pioneer Concrete from using the most modern technology.
The plant will operate in accordance with all the Environmental Appeal Board
requirements.
- It is true than ANM have an exemption, but they had that exemption long
before I became Minister.
- It is also true that Golconda Minerals have an exemption but that
was granted on the basis that it would be better to allow a small amount of
water and cyanide into the Tamar to relieve the pressure on the dam wall,
than to do nothing and face the prospects of the dam wall breaking and the
complete contents of the dam spilling into the Tamar. 

 PETER HODGMAN.
Minister for the Environment.
Hobart. How to be flexible  

I WAS intrigued to hear the Federal Employment Minister, Mr Ralph Willis,
claim that there should be more flexibility and room for negotiation in the wage
fixing mechanism.
  A fine ideal that Mr Howard has been trying to get through for the past
three years.
  However, the September issue of the journal of The Association of Consulting
Engineers of Australia states: "A new factor has arisen however. The
Department of Employment and Industrial Relations has decided to involve
itself in the discussions on free charges and a great deal of time and effort
is applied to satisfying them."
  I wonder what Mr Willis' interpretation is of the word "flexibility."

 MAX BURR, MHR
Launceston. Upside-down logic  

WHOOPEE! The new telephone book for `87 is out! Last year's design is a
success it seems, but would some clear-headed person explain exactly what
the advantages are of having the yellow-page section upside down?
  Is it part of the "Keep Fit" campaign? Or "Life be in it"? Or something
to do with "Performing Arts? Is it easier than pushing a finger a quarter
of an inch lower to find your number? (Perhaps it is to assist the
colour-blind?).  
  Does no-one else get furious with the "flipping thing" when table space,
or desk space for that matter, is almost always very limited?
  Busy business personnel are going to have to watch out for the dreaded
RSI!

 JOAN TUCKER
Sandy Bay Random danger  

THE statement by Supt Hoodless (Sunday Tasmanian 12-10-86) regarding the
visibility of police officers at random breath testing locations requires
a comment.
  I witnessed an evening RBT session being carried out in Davey St in front
of the Customs House. It was a chilling sight to see the police officers,
only 30 metres from the Market Place corner, working four lanes of traffic,
pulling their selected motorist across as many as two busy lanes to the
side of the road.
  In such circumstances is it any wonder that motorists, for their own safety
as well as that of other road users, are reluctant to "obey the signals
of a police officer?"
  The practice of conducting RBT's on multi-lane  roads, for the safety
of both the participating police and the travelling public, should be urgently
reviewed.

 K.J. BOLTON
Bridgewater  

