<subsample>
	<id> B27a </id>
	


	<source> The Weekly Times - 8 October 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Speaking out for and against wage flexibility </h>
	


	<bl> Canberra Comment
By David Kidd </bl>
	

CANBERRA - The Federal Government intends to consider and might propose
a more flexible wage fixing system to enable different wage levels at different
firms and industries.

  This was announced last week by Industrial Relations Minister, Mr Willis.
  The government is doing this in the context of the next national wage case.
But it believes any new, more flexible approach will have to be within the
centralised wage fixing system to keep control of overall wage levels.
  But in a speech he gave in Canberra Primary Industry Minister, Mr Kerin,
seemed to contradict Mr Willis.
  Mr Kerin referred to more flexibility in relative wages, or wage relativities
across industries as distinct from the average wage level.
  Mr Kerin went on to say a deregulated labor market and a wage freeze were
fundamentally incompatible.
  In Melbourne, the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission also wound up
its hearing into the National Farmers Federation claim under the federal
Pastoral Award, that the farm sector could not pay the recent national wage
increase.
  These developments also coincided with a seminar in Canberra dealing with
implications of wages and industrial policies on the competitiveness of
agricultural export industries. It was sponsored by the ACT branch of the
Agricultural Economics Society. It was here Mr Kerin made his remarks.
  Trade Unions were represented at the seminar by ACTU research officer,
Mr G.D. Bellchamber.
  Those opposing the wages and incomes accord and centralised wage fixing
were wrong, he said. The benefits of the accord to the economy and to
agriculture were clear in terms of economic growth employment growth, lower
wage and price inflation, lower unemployment, greater profitability, and
reduced industrial disputation.
  The agricultural sector stood to benefit from the greatly improved
international competitiveness which the devaluation brought*bought, if it could
be secured for the medium term.
  Mr Bellchamber said a centralised wage system offered the best prospects
for locking in that improved competitiveness.
  Continuation of that policy offered the best proposals for a sustained
beneficial impact on the agricultural sector over the medium and long term,
Mr Bellchamber asserted.
  He argued that Australia's economic predicament arose through a succession
of high current account deficits since the beginning of the 1980s.
  Professor Tom Valentine, director of the Macquarie University's centre
of money, banking and finance, criticised Labor Ministers and the union
movement who persistently attacked the people advocating deregulation of
the labor market.
  He said it was not necessary for centralised wage fixing to have the
form of the Australian system. It could be more flexible. Wages could be
indexed to export prices, and this would implement basic wage increases
on the ability of the industry and the economy to pay.

Indexation

  Prof. Valentine said wages could also be indexed directly to the unemployment
rate, so wages fell when unemployment was high. Additional flexibility could
be introduced through profit-sharing.
  He said some reform of the Arbitration Commission was needed. The government
must stop appointing lawyers to decide questions of economic importance.
  Lawyers, he said, saw their role as dispute settlers and took little account
of the impact on the economy of any decisions.
  It was about time people who had economic knowledge were appointed to
the court.
  Prof. Valentine also argued the government must stop appointing people
to the court who were members of the &quot;industrial relations club&quot;, who supported
the union view that &quot;one could never go backwards on a wage increase or
a condition when granted.&quot;
  There was no alternative, he said, to adjust to a massive fall in national
income, other than by reducing wages.
  In the absence of wage flexibility the whole burden of adjustment was
put on the unemployed. The current high level of unemployment was due almost
entirely to the lack of wage flexibility.
  Whether it was stupid militancy or militant stupidity, the unions had
gone a long way to contributing to the unemployment level, Prof. Valentine
said.
  ACIL Australia's consultant, Geoff Carmody, who represented the NFF in
the ability to pay case, criticised the assertion by Mr Kerin that Australia
could not and should not try to introduce more flexibility into the system.
  
Interesting

  He found this interesting as the Commonwealth and ACTU had engaged in
discussions on introducing more flexibility, when the new wage fixing
principles were not three months old.
  Mr Carmody said unfortunately as fast as Australia devalued, its export
prices fell on world markets, resulting in off setting declines in the terms
of trade.
  If devaluation was to generate net exports the increased production must
not be regarded as being available for distribution in higher wages. In
effect it must go to overseas markets, or to replace imports, in order to
preserve current living standards.
  Mr Carmody said the offsets to the Australian dollar's devaluation effects,
meant that exporters of farm products would not be moved to increase
production, indeed the converse was likely.
  Net exports would not be forthcoming to the extent required and the external
account problems would have to be solved by deflation of domestic demand,
increased unemployment and ultimately by lower living standards.
  The rural sector was now below the level it fell to in the 1982-83 drought,
which was regarded as a post war low point.
  Mr Carmody said a rigid centralised system could not easily cope with
that sort of situation.
  If the court could not cope with the NFF case it was doubtful if Australia
as a whole could retain the present system if its living standards were
to be preserved, he said.
  Comparative wage justice, he said, generated comparative economic injustice.
  There was a world of difference between adjustment spurred on by price
collapses and layoffs on a large scale, and a more voluntary response with
more flexible prices and wages.
  Price and wage signals were to be preferred every time. In the end they
were inevitable, Mr Carmody said.

 
</subsample>
