<subsample>
	<id> C01a </id>
	


	<source> The Weekend Australian - 6-7 December 1986 </source>
	


	<h> ART </h>
	


	<misc> Christopher Robin and Wind in the Willows
Drawings by Ernest H. Shepard
Ginger Meggs memorabilia and original artwork on loan from James Hardie Library
Blaxland Gallery 
Grace Bros city store
Sydney
Watercolours by Rose McKinley
Hogarth Gallery 
Paddington </misc>
	


	<bl> GAY RICHARDSON </bl>
	

FOR anyone who grew up with the delights of A.A. Milne's Christopher Robin
books, a visit to Sydney's Blaxland Gallery is a must.
  E.H. Shepard's enchanting illustrations of Milne's Pooh story, together
with some of the artist's drawings for The Wind in the Willows, are being
exhibited for the first time in Australia.  Shepard's illustrations at
the mid-city gallery are happy, bright watercolours or simply drawn with
pencil or pen and ink.  In the coloured pictures, Christopher Robin, Pooh,
Eyeore, Tigger, Owl, Piglet, Rabbit, Kanga and Roo are in delightfully coloured
settings - red carpet, a pink chair that looks &quot;like a chair&quot;, yellow, blue
and white wallpaper with green pieces on the mantelpiece, and suchlike
things are everywhere. 
  Ernest Howard Shepard is remembered mostly as &quot;the man who drew Pooh&quot;,
but his collaboration with Pooh's creator, A.A. Milne, represents only a
small part of his vast output as an artist and illustrator during a career
that spanned almost 70 years.  The qualities which distinguished Shepard's
work as a draughtsman were a free imagination and a vivacity of line that
marked out all his creatures as beings who lived and moved with grace and
energy, whether they were animal, human or &quot;feerie&quot;.
   Shepard was born in St John's Wood, London, on December 10, 1879.  His
father was an architect and his mother was the daughter of the celebrated
watercolourist, William Lee.  He was educated a St Paul's School, Heatherley's
Art School and the Royal Academy Schools, where he studied until 1902.
  His first book illustrations were for an edition of Tom Brown's Schooldays
in 1904.  Shepard contributed his first cartoon to Punch in 1907.
  He became one of the most prolific contributors to the humorous magazine
by doing cartoons and illustrations for it for 50 years.  In 1968, Shepard's
illustration of Christopher Robin's Pooh Bear was sold at Sotheby's for
£1200.
  It is generally felt that as a result of this, the following year Shepard
decided to give all his original sketches for the Pooh books to the British
nation.  To mark this gift, an exhibition was held at the Victoria and
Albert Museum in London; and it is from that bequest that many of the drawings
in this present exhibition have been chosen.
  Ernest Shepard was awarded the Order of the British Empire in 1972 for
his contribution to illustration.  He died at the age of 96, shortly before
the celebrations began to mark the 50th anniversary of the first publication
of Winnie-the-Pooh, which for half a century had delighted children all
over the world.  It was even translated into Latin.
  In the catalogue at the Blaxland Gallery, Sibley writes: &quot;Milne pays a
most gracious tribute to Shepard's skills when he wrote in the first American
edition of Winnie-the-Pooh:
  &quot;When I am gone,
  Let Shepard decorate my tomb,
  And put (if there is room)
  Two pictures on the stone.
  Piglet from page 111
  And Pooh and Piglet walking (157) -
  And Peter, thinking that they are my own,
  Will welcome me to Heaven.&quot;
  Before starting the work on his illustrations for the Pooh books, Shepard
visited Milne and his family in Hartfield, Sussex, where he met Christopher
and the toys and was taken by Milne to various locations in and around
the Ashdown Forest where the Pooh adventures were set.
  Shepard made numerous studies of the environment which he used as backgrounds
in his drawings, so giving convincing realism to Milne's fantasies.
  In 1982 a selection of Shepard's sketches and drawings were published
as The Pooh Sketch Book by Methuen Children's Books Ltd (London).  It was
edited by Brian Sibley who also is responsible for the informative narrative
in the illustrated catalogue accompanying the exhibition at the Blaxland
Gallery.
  According to Sibley:  &quot;The success of Ernest Shepard's illustrations 
for the books of A.A. Milne led to his being commissioned in 1928 to provide
new illustrations for a celebrated children's book, The Golden Age, by
Kenneth Grahame (1859-1932).  Two years later Shepard illustrated its sequel,
Dream Days, and in 1931 produced his magnificent pictures for Grahame's
masterpiece, The Wind in the Willows.
  First published in 1908,  Grahame's delightful tale of the riverbank
and its inhabitants had been illustrated by various artists, but the author
was not happy with their work.  In 1954 Shepard observed: &quot;There are certain
books that should never be illustrated and I had felt that The Wind in the
Willows was one of these.  Perhaps, if it had not already been done, I
should not have given way to the desire to do it myself, but it so happened
that when the opportunity was offered me, I seized upon it gladly.&quot;
  Shepard visited Grahame, then an old man, at his home in Berkshire.  Grahame
courteously listened as Shepard spoke of his plans for the book.  Then,
leaning forward, he said to the artist: &quot;I love these little people, be
kind to them.&quot;  Shepard was kind to Toad and Ratty, Mole and Badger,
faithfully and sensitively capturing, in line, the fantasy and romance
of Grahame's riverbank idyll.  Shepard was to meet Grahame only once more
before the author's death.  When he took the completed illustrations
to show him.  &quot;Though critical,&quot; Shepard later said, &quot;he seemed pleased and,
chuckling, told me `I'm glad you've made them real'.&quot;  
  These &quot;real people&quot; - a Rat and a Mole who go rowing and a Toad who drives
a motor car, also feature in the E.H. Shepard Exhibition at the Blaxland
Gallery, along with a Ginger Meggs exhibition.
  The artwork and memorabilia from the James Hardie Library is being exhibited
at the Blaxland Gallery to commemorate the 65th birthday of that lovable
Australian cartoon character, Ginger Meggs.
  Grace Bros are to be congratulated for using the Blaxland Gallery as
a museum, rather than as a commercial venue for almost two months.  Director
Margaret Meagher, said:  &quot;We'll be keeping the loan exhibition on until
January 23.  I am very pleased, as our Beatrix Potter one, which only lasted
two weeks, was far too short, but we are planning to have another Beatrix
Potter show next year.&quot;
  To support Australian art, Grace Bros will sponsor for the next three years
Australia's most prestigious and best known art awards - the Archibald,
Wynne and Sulman Prizes.  The sponsorships total $150,000.

New Zealander Rose McKinley, who lives at Byron Bay in NSW, is having her
first Sydney success at the Hogarth Gallery, in Paddington.  She does
competent, easy-to-live-with watercolours which have a personal touch, as
she puts many things relating to her life in these works.
  Rose, who attended the Sydney College of the Arts in Balmain when Guy
Warren (last year's Archibald Prize winner) was the principal lecturer and
the head of the painting department, gives a great deal of credit to what
she was taught at the college.
  McKinley had done only a little art at school in New Zealand, where she first
became interested*interest in sound objects which still appear in her 
pictures.  She said: &quot;John Lethbridge, the sculpture teacher at the Sydney 
College of the Arts, used to tell me to concentrate on my own conceptions and 
my own past.  He told me to use myself and my everyday life as the source of my
work.&quot;
  This is a feature in McKinley's present exhibition.  There are pictures 
within pictures which personally relate to her life.
 Her achievements to date include a sellout of her recent exhibition at
the Cape Galleries in Byron Bay and winning the Ballina Art Prize, the
Kyogle Art Prize and twice being awarded the Byron Bay Prize.  Says McKinley:
&quot;I am always amazed when people really like what I do.  At first I thought
who would want to see my grandmother's table-cloth or a print that belonged
to my aunt, of a tree-lined avenue in Europe in a picture or a postcard
of the Madonna sent to me from Tuscany?  But, people seem to like them.&quot;
  McKinley also says she is often governed by the seasons.  &quot;The works
I started in spring and others I did in late autumn and winter, all have
different flowers in them.  In a painting I did in wintertime in Byron
Bay, I put chrysanthemums.  I also put in mangoes and Jamaica limes because
we grow them where we live.&quot;  
  This personal touch &quot;comes across&quot; in Rose McKinley's colourful watercolours.


</subsample>
