Stars add power to Cyclone By ANDREW WEST  

AS the umpteenth and final Australian mini-series to be screened this year,
it is appropriate that Cyclone Tracy recreates our worst natural disaster
with a blend of compassion and adventure.
  Cyclone Tracy (Channel 9, Wednesday, 8.30pm) boasts one of the strongest
Australian casts assembled for a contemporary drama.
  AFI award-winner Chris Haywood is again a natural as Steve Parry, the
television reporter who strikes up a friendship, and ultimately a love affair,
with Connie (Tracy Mann).
  Mann, another AFI winner, gives a spirited performance as a widowed publican
trying to raise children and run a business.

 Gillmer excels  

Despite her talent, however, she seems overawed by the wealth of experience
around her.
  Caroline Gillmer excels as Little Caroline, Connie's mother, in a solid,
understated portrayal of a woman deserted by her husband. 
  Tony Barry is equally powerful but, in contrast to Gillmer's reserve,
is emphatic in his portrayal of Mick Brennen, Little Caroline's former husband
and Connie's father.
  But there is something disconcerting about American accents on Australian
TV, and the series suffers in this regard.
  Nicholas Hammond, who found fame in The Sound of Music 20 years ago and
recently appeared in The Challenge, is burdened with a role that is crucial
to an irrelevant sub-plot.
  He plays a drug-courier on the run from Billy Hong (Johann Huang), a
narcotics dealer.
  
  Distracting  

Because the mini-series spans three nights, the sub-plot is a necessary
respite from the cyclone, but it interrupts the program at its most dramatic
moments.
  Cyclone Tracy is also saddled with a lingering first episode.
  It takes more than an hour to establish the characters, who amble from
scene to scene etching out situations that could send many viewers to sleep.
  Because of Cyclone Tracy's place in history, however, this mini-series
will survive.
  In fact, some of the special effects are so realistic, don't be surprised
if they hold a telethon afterwards!

