Deadly Ernest summer duel The Dangerous Summer, by Ernest Hemingway.
Published by Grafton Books. Paperback. $8.95. Reviewed by COL MACKAY  

  ERNEST Hemingway had a fascination for those who lived dangerously and
death itself.
  His novel and short stories mirrored this fascination with innumerable
scenes of his heroes facing their final destinies, either bravely or in
a desperate last-ditch attempt to expunge the taint of cowardice from their
earth-bound souls. Hemingway referred to it as "the moment of truth". His
own moment of truth, however, was not to be as glorious as the heroes he
either wrote factually about or simply manufactured.
  In 1960 he ignominiously ended his own life by blasting out his brains
with a shotgun.
  Whether his suicide was the result of a moment of insanity, as his friends
claim, or whether it was through his frustration at not being able to
physically emulate truly the deeds of his heroes - as has been claimed by
his detractors - remains open to question.
 
 Observations  

  But there is no question as to Hemingway's ability to record on paper
his observations of bravery, cowardice and even bewilderment of his characters
facing their moment of truth.
  It was this that led him in 1959 to agree to travel back to Spain to write
for Life magazine an account of the rivalry between Spain's two greatest
bullfighters, Luis Miguel Dominguin and Antonio Ordonez.
  He was convinced that the fierce duel between Dominguin, who had emerged
from retirement to re-establish himself as the world's greatest bullfighter
in the face of the challenge from the younger and incredibly gifted Ordonez,
would lead to one of them being killed.
  Neither was to die, but the suicidal feats the two great matadors
performed that summer against one another across the bullrings of Spain
in their bid to win the ultimate acclamation from aficionados 
and the blood-hungry crowds, left them with serious wounds on several occasions.
  Hemingway became so obsessed with the duel and the behind the scenes action
in the lives of Dominguin, Ordonez, and the  the anxiety of their 
families and friends as to the outcome, he eventually wrote 100,000 words 
about the drama.
  Of this, Life bought a selection of 50,000 words and finally in 1960
published 30,000 words in a three-part series.
  Hemingway and his friend, author A E Hotchner, who had also been present
when most of the action between Dominguin and Ordonez took place, then trimmed
the original manuscript down to 75,000 words.
  Almost 25 years after Hemingway had completed the manuscript, his American
publishers, Charles Scribner's Sons, severely reduced it and published it
under the title The Dangerous Summer.
  Hailed by publicists as Hemingway's "lost masterpiece", The Dangerous
Summer falls well short of such an accolade. But the author's familiar prose
in describing his characters and the beauty and simplicity of the Spanish
countryside are vintage Hemingway.
  Before his initial return to Spain in 1953, he had lived in self-imposed
exile from the country he described as "loving more than any other except
my own", following his involvement in the Spanish Civil War and his
idealistic opposition to the victorious Franco regime - probably best framed
in his novel For Whom The Bell Tolls.
  Hemingway buffs are aware that before "Papa" became a successful novelist
and short story writer, he was one of America's foremost and innovative
sports writers.
  And it is his gift as a highly talented and almost magically observant
sports writer that shines through dominantly in his telling of The Dangerous
Summer. It is a style most modern-day sports writers would be well advised
to study.
                              
