Nimrod hopes all ends well All's Well That Ends Well. Nimrod production at the Seymour Centre.
Shining. Sydney Dance Company production at the Sydney Opera House.Reviewed by DAVID COLVILLE  

  CONNOISSEURS of Shakespeare will rejoice in the Nimrod's new production
of the rarely performed All's Well That Ends Well, which opened on Tuesday
night at the Seymour Centre.
  It is a stylish production, soundly acted by some of Australia's leading
talents, but its memorable moments are situational rather than born of
any outstanding individual performance.
  It is unlikely to be the huge box office success which the Nimrod needs
to finish its ambitious 1986 season, and this could be a cause for concern
in an arts environment dependent on the whims of sometimes short-sighted
government bureaucrats.
  In this respect it is important to step back and to view the production
for what it is: a brave experiment which allows us to enter the world of
an author of genius in the making. We should thank the Nimrod for this
opportunity. 
  The play's story is simple. The orphaned Helena (Celia de Burgh) is in
love with Bertram (Simon Burke), son of the Countess of Rossillion (Ruth
Cracknell). When Bertram is sent to the court of the ailing King of France
(Ron Graham), Helena follows and neatly manages to cure the king.
  Her reward is the man of her choice, and Bertram is not at all pleased
to be chosen.
  Bertram rushes off to the Italian wars only to be followed by the persistent
Helena, who tricks him into bed and succeeds in becoming pregnant. (Radical
feminists are warned against this play). All ends happily with the two young
people reconciled to their wedded bliss.
  All this occupies nearly 2 1/2 hours of playing time which occasionally
drags because of a sometimes unformed text. The efforts of designer Judith
Hoddinott to modernise the action by placing the characters in costumes
representing various periods of the 20th century do not succeed in diverting
the audience from this fact.
  There is much to enjoy in Richard Cottrell's production. Even though
many of the characters are two-dimensional, consummate artists such 
as Ruth Cracknell and Ron Graham always impress with their sheer 
professionalism.

