Staging limits spirited return BALLET THE QUEENSLAND BALLET
Scheherazade:Choreography by Jacqui Carroll, music by Rimsky-Korsakov, designed
by Mike Bridges.
Frankie and Johnny: Choreography by Andris Toppe, music by David Pyle and
the players, design by Bill Haycock.
Glen Street Theatre. Frenchs Forest. August 20-23  

  THE Queensland Ballet is a tight-knit ensemble with exciting vigour,
considerable skill and a fighting spirit that gives it engaging appeal.
  It's nearly six years since the company has performed in Sydney, and those
years have obviously been well spent in building a strong and flexible group
of young dancers. In the process, it has developed a nuggetty character
that melds together the variety of dancing styles it presents.
  Although it is firmly based in classicism, The Queensland Ballet is just
as likely to tackle the kind of choreography that you might see in a
contemporary musical. It appears to thrive on a diet of new work and contrasts.
  The double bill it has brought to Sydney sums up its stylistic approach,
though the minuscule size of the stage (in dance terms) means that we're
not seeing them at full stretch. Scheherazade, for example, looks far better
in a bigger venue, as I saw it in Canberra a year ago. There, the ensemble
sections could take off and provide a robust balance to the intimacy of
the duets. Here they have nowhere to go.
  Nevertheless, it's good to have the chance to see the fine qualities of
Rosetta Cook, whose performance in the title role was characterised by sinuous
movement and poetic phrasing with a flowing finish to every move she made
on stage. She was ably partnered by Dale Pengelly.
  The work itself is uneven. Its main creative weakness is its 
predictability, both in terms of its literal response to the music and its use
of the established neo-classical choreographic vocabulary. On the credit
side, there are some challenging sequences for the dancers - notably in the 
duets for Scheherazade and the Traveller - and they accomplish them with 
practised ease.
  Frankie and Johnny also has its high and low points. Andris Toppe has created
an exciting series of solos and duets, which were well executed in
appropriately incisive style, but he hasn't achieved the same level of success
with the ensemble side of the piece.
  I don't think he has been helped by what seemed to me a confusing scenario.
A program note quotes thoughts about the contradictions of America, which
are presumably meant to be encapsulated by this sordid little tale of deception
and death from a seamy, male-dominated segment of society from yesteryear.
Or were they? The whole piece was presented as a jolly romp, a good excuse
for fun and frolic, when ironic comment seemed to be more apt. But I may
be taking it all too seriously - encouraged, I must admit, by the jazz score,
which built on the popular song of the title to develop areas of greater
depth than anything that was offered on stage.

 JILL SYKES  

