Voice of reason in a revival of past styles An aspect of the Debra Dawes installation .. contributes to the abstract
art debate. GALLERIES By JOANNA MENDELSSHON  

  IN A WEEK dominated by fragmented visions and incoherent polemics, Debra
Dawes's installation at the Union Street Gallery adds a quiet voice of reason.
In doing so she also makes a significant contribution to the never-ending
debate on the nature of abstract art. The title of the piece, Three narratives:
an autobiography, gives the viewer the clue as to her motives in producing
this series of small square paintings based on Mondrian, Morandi and her
own domesticity.
  The paintings proceed in sequences of three - a Morandi, a Mondrian,
then a Dawes. The copies of the famous artists are carefully crafted. Dawes
is careful to match both Morandi's tonality and the essential hand-made
quality of Mondrian's work. The third piece in this sequence, the "original",
is a blue, yellow and black variation of an electric jug, or occasionally
a carefully planned figure grouping. As the sequence progresses, the paintings
become intertwined - Morandi meets Mondrian, meets Dawes.
  The exhibition is partly a response to the impact of seeing Mondrian for
the first time and absorbing the difference between the sharp-edged
photographs of his work and the untidy reality of canvas and paint. Both
Mondrian and Morandi were concerned with expressions of inner reality,
classical proportions and the Golden Mean. Dawes uses this preoccupation
to remind the viewer that careful placement of shapes and lines within a
picture plane has no necessary connection with the supposed virtues of abstract
art.
  The latest of many exhibitions on abstract painting is Pure Abstraction
at The Painters Gallery. This is worth a visit simply for the chance to
see one of Tony Tuckson's finest paintings, an Untitled of the late 1950s.
It is both delicate and strong, with light scribbles of rust paint on a
thick surface scratched in white. At the time it was painted, Tuckson was
a totally private painter. His unusually strong sense of professional ethics
meant that only friends and a few fellow artists knew the assistant director
of the Art Gallery of New South Wales was an artist.
  There are other works of interest in Pure Abstraction - paintings by Ralph
Balson and Robert Hunter, drawings and pastels by Robert Jacks and Leslie
Dumbrell. There is also the awkward inclusion of a hard-edge masking tape
and acrylic piece by Col Jordan. On the whole, the exhibition reflects the
awkwardness of confusing style and content in the selection of a group
exhibition. Perhaps it is a sign of the aesthetic rear-guard attitudes of
the proponents of the "pure", but only one woman artist is included.
  Polly MacCallum's sculpture and drawings at the Coventry Gallery helps
add to the overall impression of this week as a series of revivals of styles
of the past. Her perspex sculptures and pencil lines evoke old school geometry
sets with sharp angles and pointed edges. On a more elevated plane, they
bring back memories of Margo Lewers's sculptures of the 1950s. As well as
small pieces and maquettes for larger ones, the exhibition includes photographs
of enlargements and earlier works, almost a mini-retrospective.

