This Brady beats the bunch RECORDS Clark Forbes  

  PAUL Brady is an Irishman and according to Bob Dylan, Eric Clapton, Bono
(U2), and Mark (turbo) Knoffler the finest thing since Fenders.
  I came across Brady after a periodic cleanout of the review pile. There
was an enigmatically jacketed album titled Back To The Centre. And after
a close listen Back To The Centre (Polygram: LP: 826809-1. C: 826809-4,
CD: 826809-2), would have to be shortlisted as one of the year's top 10 albums.
  Brady's been around for a decade or so and in that time his songs have
been covered by Tina Turner and Santana and he's toured as support to Clapton
and Dire Straits.
  The artist as young man launched himself on the Irish R & B scene (yes,
Maureen, there was such a beast), and later joined the Johnstone's, known
only for their cover of Joni Mitchell's Both Sides Now.
  Brady's first album though would not have shamed the bog Irish Clancy
Brothers.
  In the early 80s he turned to rock but failed to convince the Americans
he was capable of doing anything but break them.
  His song Steel Claw was picked up by Tina Turner and included on Private
Dancer and tours with Clapton and Straits followed.
  Now we have Back To The Centre. Praise be to Polygram for adding this LP
to their catalogues in the knowledge that airplay on EON or Fox would be
as likely as peace in our time in Ulster.
  Brady's an interesting mix: there's a bit of Chris Rea, Australia's own
Kevin Johnstone, a dash of Dylan and a little bit of Ireland's own Christy
Moore.
  Which means the Brady boy has a voice which can be clearly heard over
the electric and acoustic guitars, piano, keyboards, and tin whistle he
plays. Versatile fellow.
  And on this LP he's helped by Eric Clapton doing what comes naturally
on electric guitar.
  The result is a touch of rock magic. Brady swings from electric top 40
(well, top 80, anyway), on Wheel of Heartbreak to acoustic ballads such
as Follow On and the moving Homes of Donegal.
  Even some quiet and puzzled protest on The Island:
  "And I guess the young boys dying in the ditches,
  is just what being free is all about."
  Brady's rock lyricism is as Irish as falling in love.

  A COUPLE of weeks back I wondered whether Paul McCartney wasn't losing
his grip, over the hill, just plain wrinkly.
  This week I wonder the same about John Fogarty.
  Long live Creedance Clearwater Revival, but hasn't the time come to bury
Fogarty?
  Eye of the Zombie (WEA 25449-1), contributes nothing but a pain in the
rump to a burgeoning collection of rock that seems to have no purpose other
than self-indulgence.
  Same old wailing voice over equally pained lyrics. Talk of bazookas, M16s,
doom gloom and general psyche-shriek.
  Give it away John and let's remember you the way you were.

  SUZZANE Vega Live In London 1986 (L20054, C20054), is a bit of a puzzle,
following so close to her last LP.
  It's an AM cheapie at $9.99 and for that you get six tracks of post-punk
Suzzane singing in London. Not bad value for a looser version of the
distinctive Vega style.
  
 