Bright books for children By JOANNE ANDERS  

JOHN and Betty wouldn't approve. Neither would Spot.
  Phillip Institute lecturer Diane Snowball and a team of children's literature
experts have launched an assault on traditional school reading for primary
school students.
  They have produced a range of bright and glossy books designed to make
reading enjoyable, not a chore.
  The Bookshelf project began two years ago, when Ms Snowball decided to
do something about adding to the type of reading material young children
were getting in school.
  A former primary school teacher and teacher-librarian, she felt that much
of the material available was too drab and stilted to encourage children
to read.
  When children start school they tend to get books that aren't as rewarding
as they've had.
  "Especially if they come from a home where parents have been reading to
them, they're usually reading very attractive picture story books and they
come to school and they get a very plain looking reader."
  Her response was to put together a reading program, made up of books that
look like the sort of material children read for enjoyment at home, with
all the same details such as information about authors and illustrators,
pop-up and pull out sections.
  The first series of 18 Bookshelf books, aimed at five and six-year-olds,
was released five months ago and a second series aimed at seven-year-olds
is due out in November.
  Ms Snowball, spends most of her time on her publishing operation, but
is also a sessional lecturer in language and reading at the Phillip Institute
of Technology.
  She says children do not consider the standard school reader as being a
"real book."
  "If you ask `Do you like reading?' they'll say to you `Do you mean real
books or what we do at school?"'
  The content of the Bookshelf series has been designed to be as diverse
as children would find anywhere else.
  The first series includes audio tapes containing music, poetry and readings
of stories.
  It has been looked at by teachers in an estimated one quarter to one third
of Australian primary schools.
  Diane Snowball is the main force behind the project, but there is also
a Bookshelf team made up of teachers, lecturers and other children's
literature experts, who assess manuscripts, rewrite them where necessary
and also write some of the books.
  Books in the first series contain more sophisticated language than you
might expect.
  "One of the misconceptions about young children is that they need easy
words," Ms Snowball says.
  "But if you read (more sophisticated material) to them they are more likely
to pick up on the more interesting and complex words. They usually know
how to spell `elephant' before they can spell `come'.
  "The amount of their preschool time spent watching television has also
made them more worldly than they are often given credit for and this has
to be taken into account when writing non-fiction material," Ms Snowball
says.
  "You have to be very careful to not tell children something they already
know, because they're so much more worldly from what they see on television."
  Ms Snowball and her colleagues do not claim to be the only ones producing
brighter books for young students, but she says many students are using
books which are more sophisticated in form but not substance.
  "They look brighter, but in terms of the language content a lot of them
are still very stilted in their language, limited vocabulary and 
so forth and they aren't a real story.
  "They don't have a sense of plot around real characters. They tend to
be repetitive sentences and don't really go anywhere, but that's changing
greatly on the Australian scene."
  At this stage, the Bookshelf project looks like continuing until 1989
when the aim is to have books for all levels of primary schooling.
  Export markets such as the US, New Zealand and the UK are also being looked
at.
  The books, published by Martin Educational in association with Ashton
Scholastic, are available from educational booksellers.
   
