Grim topic tv telegraph By PAUL WICKS  

  The ugly subject of rape appears in two of Channel 7's regular US police
series in the next six nights.
  In tonight's episode of "Cagney and Lacey", Chris Cagney (Sharon Gless)
is working unsuccessfully on a case of rape, but receives a lot of help
from a temporary partner, played by Julie Fulton, who looks at times like
a young Audrey Hepburn. Yes, she is that pretty.
  (Cagney's usual partner Mary Beth Lacey is off on maternity leave).
  However, the new partner becomes obsessed with the case, for a variety
of reasons, causing Cagney to have some mixed feelings.
  It's another solid offering from the show about two likeable, but frenetic
New York cops.
  But the drama of this rape issue doesn't quite reach the impact heights
of next Tuesday night's special length edition of "Hunter".
  There's much drama then, because the joint star of the show, Dee Dee
(Stepfanie Kramer) is the victim.
  The scenes of the attack and, particularly, the soul-destroying aftermath
are dramatically effective, and a quality highpoint - if there can be such
a thing when dealing with the trauma of rape.
  Kramer shows that she is not just a good looker. She's a good actress,
too.
  Predictably, her partner Hunter (Fred Dryer) is outraged by the rape and
goes to extreme measures to nail the offender - who seems likely to gain
diplomatic immunity.
  Sadly, the second hour of the episode in which the pair head to a
strangely-named foreign country (it was probably shot in neighboring Mexico)
degenerates into little more than a shoot'em out, run-and-chase sequence
- something you'd expect in a lesser show. It isn't a patch on the earlier
scenes.
  The episode is not the first of movie-length in the "Hunter" series. Perhaps
for the purposes of quality, this one should have been condensed into just
the one hour.

  Best show tonight is the second episode in the "Clive James On Television"
series at 8.30 on Channel 2.
  Although not exactly new, it's still highly entertaining. Mind you, it
doesn't have much opposition.

  In spite of some union problems, Channel 9 claims it has enough episodes
of its "Flying Doctors" series in its stockpile to ride out the storm so
far.
  I believe there are about a dozen "in the can". However, any problems
will hit here first, because Channel 9 locally is a week ahead of the rest
of the country having begun with a double-header.
            
