JAZZ Precision, power, and professionalism SA - Texas: The United
States of Jazz
Festival Theatre
Wednesday  

  THE North Texas State University One O'Clock Band is aptly named.
  "One O'Clock." The connotations are all there - and so correct. The "one"
stands for a winner, and this big band fills that spot with polished power.
The "clock" stands for time, the essence of which is an essential ingredient
in any top jazz aggregation - and these 20 musicians had the mix just right.
  North Texas State University has nine big bands - from one o'clock to
nine o'clock - and this one leads the way. Ironically, not one Texan is
in the team: two Swedes, two Canadians and the rest from throughout the
US.
  The program opened nicely enough with the SACAE Big Band, conducted by
Hal Hall, taking us on a smooth musical ride from classic Ellingtonia through
some Big Band Bop before finishing the journey with a ballad featuring Andrew
Firth.
  They can hold their heads high when compared with other college outfits
in this country. But the gold medal had to go to the One O'Clock Lab Band.
  In a performance which demonstrated precision, power and professionalism,
the Lab Band (directed by Neil Slater) amply demonstrated why it is so highly
acclaimed by leading jazz performers throughout the world.
  Whether it was in the attack of Escape Velocity, the subtleties and sombre
voicings of Nuance, the nicely paced ballad I'm Old Fashioned (building
into a crescendo of biting brass), or the brisk encore Machito - the band
failed in only one respect. It failed to expose any weakness in either
ensemble playing or solo performance.
  But if North Texas took gold, there were other medals, too. To senior
lecturer, musician and composer Eric Bryce for his four-part suite Jazz
Through The Looking Glass performed in the second half by the combined Lab
Band, SACAE strings and Big Band, and to the featured artists: Andrew Firth
(clarinet) and vocalist Angela Smith.
  Undoubtedly, this concert was one of the successes of the Jubilee 150
Youth Music Festival.

 Don Porter  

