<subsample>
	<id> C15b </id>
	


	<source> The Sun Herald - 3 August 1986 </source>
	

 
	<h> LEGEND MAKES A COMEBACK </h>
	

 
	<h> IN THE TRUE NELLIE MELBA TRADITION </h>
	


	<bl> By GEORGE WILSON </bl>
	

SHE was Australia's greatest superstar. In the public imagination she
ranks with Ned Kelly, Don Bradman and Phar Lap.
  And as the bi-centenary  nears, the story of Dame Nellie Melba, who died
55 years ago, will be told more times than she had farewells.
  The Seven television network is making a multi-million dollar mini series
on her life; a highway near Melbourne has been named after her, and a new
book about the opera singer refers to her as the most famous woman Australia
has yet produced.
  Dame Nellie Melba, who began her international singing career in Brussels,
Belgium, 100 years ago, flaunted her Australianism before the crowned heads
of Europe when a majority of people did not know where Australia was.
  Yet Melba's latest biographer, Dr Therese Radic, records on the first
page of her book*: &quot;Melba was variously called a vexatious daughter, a runaway
wife, a bad mother and a loose woman; she was a divorcee and mistress of
the pretender to the French throne.
  &quot;She was a fat soprano, vain, vulgar, imperious and a snob. She had a
taste for second-class music and she swore, but she was not a drunkard as
rumor had it.
  &quot;She was racist and, men said, sexist. She was also a shrewd, self-made
woman whose miraculous voice helped her amass a fortune and win her
international acclaim; Australians worshipped at the shrine of her success.&quot;
  Melba was born Helen Porter Mitchell in 1861, the daughter of a builder
who became a millionaire in &quot;marvellous Melbourne&quot;, as it was known in
the 1880s, she lived on the outskirts of the city, at Lilydale, where her
former home is now a tourist attraction and where the newly named, 62 km
long Melba highway runs from Coldstream to Yea at the foot of Victoria's
snowfields.
  Melba had learned to sing Comin' Through the Rye when she was aged only
six, she played Beethoven's Moonlight Sonata on the piano by the time she
was eight and learned the organ when she was 12.
  Dr Radic's book claims that false legends were wildly attributed to the
famous Melba.
  One of her early music teachers, Otto Vogt, started a story that after
her organ lessons, Nellie would gallop down to the Yarra River, strip off
and swim nude with local boys.
  Others said she used language unsuitable for ladies, she threw milk,
her breakfast, even scissors at people who offended her and at one stage
she supposedly attempted to seduce the local clergyman.
  Nellie took the name Melba at the start of her career from her love for
her home city.
  Her only marriage (in Mackay, Queensland) to Charles Armstrong, a seaman,
horse trader and son of a baronet, failed, but their son, George, after
long separations from his mother, was reunited with her late in her life.
  Despite her musical background, Melba did not sing professionally until
she was 23. International recognition came only after her father took up
a diplomatic appointment in London in the mid-1880s and after coaching
by Paris teacher Madame Matilda Marchesi.

  AFTER Nellie Melba's debut in October 1887, critics wrote of her: &quot;She
is the sensation of the day&quot;, &quot;her voice is a revelation&quot;, and called her
&quot;the young Antipodean with the profile of an empress&quot;.
  The range of Dame Nellie's voice was described by one authority as from
B flat below middle C to the F sharp above high C. Critics called it a unique,
silvery voice, pure and seamless with the power to sweep the listener to
emotional heights and near religious ecstasy.
  For almost 40 years, Dame Nellie Melba sang at every major European and
American opera house and, on return visits to Australia, in the small bush
halls which she always made part of her tours. 
  Gossip about an affair with Louis Philippe, Duc d'Orleans, the great
grandson of the last French king, pretender to the throne of France and
nine years her junior, almost wrecked Dame Nellie's career after they met
when she was 29.
  On her early homecomings to Australia in 1902, 1907 and 1909, Dame Nellie
suffered from allegations of drunkenness from a Sydney newspaper editor,
John Norton, but, as Dr Radic writes:
  &quot;It was useless to protest that no singer who was drunk could perform
to schedule as Melba did. Even now, when the idiocy of such an accusation
has long since been established, the rest of the mud splashed by Norton
is still visible on Nellie's tarnished career.'
  A phrase that entered the English language, &quot;more farewells than Nellie
Melba&quot;, is defended by Radic.
  The author says that tradition in the early 20th century permitted great
performers to declare final farewells in the places where their reputations
were made.
  Dr Radic, a playwright and associate of the faculty of music at the
University of Melbourne, says that Melba was the fulfilment and the symbol
of the Australian dream, she showed how Australians could be proud of their
cultural origins and that they need no longer cringe to the English.
  It is ironic that Dr Radic should liken Melba to Ned Kelly, Bradman
and Phar Lap in the public imagination and raise the mystery of her death.
  Like Phar Lap, there are still theories that Melba was suffering from
a mystery disease when she died in Sydney, in 1931.
  Dr Radic writes that Melba had surgery for a facelift in Europe and suffered
an infection on the sea voyage to Australia. 
  Dame Nellie had requested that after her death she was to be embalmed
and that a beautician should make up her face before anyone was permitted
to see her.
    
	<misc> * Melba, the Voice of Australia, by Theresa Radic (Macmillan, $29.95). </misc>
	


</subsample>
