PATRIOTISM, THE CULT OF THE WINNER, AND PLAIN DEJA VU TOP GUN (PG)
Directed by Tony Scott. Starring Tom Cruise and Kelly McGillis. Lyceum **  

  THERE'S been a lot of hullabaloo surrounding this film, about its politics
and box office success. But Top Gun is really a familiar movie formula with
some expensive props - a squadron of $30 million planes.
  Lieutenant Pete Mitchell (Tom Cruise) is a navy pilot selected for the elite
fighter training course, known as Top Gun. The idea is to cream off the
best pilots and train them up to a wartime standard of dogfighting. They've
all got snappy call signs like Maverick (Cruise), Goose, Iceman and Viper.
  In the absence of a real enemy, the pilots turn on each other - in fierce
competition to see who will be the best of the best, the top Top Gun. And
Maverick is the most aggressive and cocky of them all, flying against the
ghost of his dead father's reputation. People spend a lot of time muttering
about how dangerous and talented he is - "a wild card".
  Cruise's love interest is a Pentagon astro-physicist, played by Kelly
McGillis. At first, she's more interested in his plane than his body. But
Maverick does a few quick manoeuvres, like the plucky little dog-fighter
he is, and the girl is his.
  Amid the roaring jets and the steamy love scenes, Top Gun is actually
a bit dull. The movie is entirely predictable, with a constant, vague sense
of deja vu, reminders of a dozen war and flying movies you've seen before.
  The plot consists of a few hiccups in a single-note story, with little
character or story development.
  Director Tony Scott captures some of the magic of flying as the planes
prepare to take off, in stylish, atmospheric sequences. But the dog-fights
themselves confused me, with jets zooming in all directions and the pilots
barking incomprehensible techno-babble and slang into their radios.
  Top Gun is really a hymn to the Cult of the Best, a glorification of
competition. Winning is all - "there are no points for second place". It's
like finding yourself in a meathead self-improvement lecture.
  The unquestioning patriotism is really incidental - fighting the Commies
just happens to be the way these guys are going to prove they're the best.
  The contrived "incident" with enemy planes is certainly offensive and
disturbing, but it's also pretty absurd, with faceless Soviet pilots in
black helmets.
  Top Gun is also a hymn to maleness. It inadvertently shows up how ridiculous
male courtship behaviour is, with lots of locker room strutting and posing.
The movie takes any excuse to take off the actors' shirts, undo their jeans
and show off a bit of meaty pectoral or rock-hard abdomen.
  Cruise doesn't have much to do other than ripple his jaw muscles and grin
cockily. It's hard to care much about Maverick.
  Kelly McGillis has even less to do. What a shame to see the sultry,
compelling actress from Witness wasted as mere decoration. She spends most
of the movie bending her knees so that she's not taller than Cruise.

