Denim-clad Kelly hits the charts at last ALBUM'S MESSAGE  

  Paul Kelly And The Coloured Girls - a little bit of Bob Dylan, a small
piece of Lou Reed and a whole lot of inner-city living.
  Softly-spoken and reserved, the denim-clad Kelly at last receives
commercial recognition for the music he has played for nearly a decade.
  Born in Adelaide, Kelly first picked up an acoustic guitar at 18, enduring
a semester of university before moving to Melbourne.
  He spent seven years in the Victorian capital among St Kilda prostitutes,
drug addicts and unemployed.
  And it shows in his music. The skilfully crafted lyrics are backed by
a basic sound and sung by a voice with sandpaper resonance.
  Paul Kelly wrote a song called From St Kilda To Kings Cross.
  The distance takes 13 hours on a bus and Kelly made that trip two years
ago and found Surry Hills. More inner-city; prostitutes, drug addicts and
squats full of the unemployed.
  "St Kilda? It's a good place, St Kilda, but it's getting - it's changing
now, it's becoming, well, they're trying to clean it up," Kelly said.
  "Closing down all the old boarding houses and trying to make it go upmarket
- they did the same thing to Bondi.
  "Surry Hills - that's a mixture too, one end is industrial. There's
a lot of old migrant groups there, a fair few Greeks and a lot of people
in bands."
  Kelly appeared in Brisbane over the weekend and will now town-hop up
the Queensland coast to Townsville.
  Before Too Long, now resting in the music charts, is his first commercially
successful work. He has always had respect, but respect does not pay the
rent.
  "It's great, great, to be hearing it on the radio everywhere - it's
exciting," Kelly said.

   Release  

  Tomorrow, a double studio album recorded by Kelly And The Coloured Girls -
named after the line from the Lou Reed song - will be released.

 The album will be a volume of old and new songs, inspired by social
conscience, or as a member of the band says, social realism.
                                                             
