`Brumby' gives a kick to WA's disc State orchestras in major record series  

  THE ABC has undertaken an exciting project to produce discs featuring
each of Australia's six State orchestras.
  They're already available in black vinyl and compact discs are to follow.
  Importantly, they are to gain world-wide audiences through a distribution
arrangement with the UK, as well as  with Festival Records, in Australia.
  The first two releases were the Sydney Symphony Orchestra - with a
performance of Beethoven's Choral Ninth, conducted by Wilfred Lehmann and
including the Sydney Philharmonic Choir - and the WA Symphony Orchestra.
  I find the WASO presentation more appealing because it includes two
works by Australian composers.
  In view of plans to give the recordings wide coverage, this had to be
a great opportunity to sneak in compositions from our own talented people.
  Richard Mills took over the orchestra on the last two tracks to conduct
the Festival Overture on Australian Themes by Colin Brumby and Mills' own
Overture with Fanfare.
  The Overture and Fanfare is an exciting work with the element of Queensland
clearly interpolated - it was written for the Queensland Youth Orchestra.
  You can hear the tune Moreton Bay in its central section after the energetic
opening following the percussive fanfare, with WASO's excellent brass section
in fine form.
  In the Brumby work there is a nostalgic feeling of country with the
inclusion of some of our most notable and easily distinguishable folk tunes.

   Bullroarer  

  There's also the boom of the bullroarer for good measure.
  David Measham is the conductor of British composer Malcolm Arnold's Little
Suite No 1 and Little Suite No 2.
  The former chief conductor of the WASO, who did so much to lift its public
image, knew Arnold and produces all the charm and sparkle of these lovely
cameos for orchestra.
  Dobbs Franks was understandably the conductor of Don Gillis's fascinating
Portrait of a Frontier Town, for he was able to bring his homeland knowledge
to this clever portrayal of what can  best be described as an American tone
poem.
  The Melbourne Symphony Orchestra has played somewhat safe with Tchaikovsky's
Symphony No 5 in E minor, with Dutch conductor Hubert Soudant.
  Nevertheless it was performed with style. 
  I was more attracted to the Queensland Symphony Orchestra's performances
of Respighi's Suite in G for Organ and Strings and Elgar's most beautiful
Sea Pictures, in which Margreta Elkins is the mezzo soloist.
  The Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra has chosen Respighi's suite for small
orchestra, The Birds, with Francaix's The Floral Clock and Richard 
Strauss's Capriccio: Prelude.
  Adelaide has an all-Mozart offering - the Concerto in C for flute, harp
and orchestra, and Piano Concerto No 19 in F.
                       
