<sample>
	<id> D02 </id>
	


	<note> 2011 words </note>
	


	<source> The force of the feminine. </source>
	


	<bl> By Barbara Thiering </bl>
	


	<h> 3   Sexism and fundamentalism </h>
	

The word `fundamentalism' has been introduced to the public in recent years
by journalists. It was applied first to the Muslim revolution, which revived
a traditional sexual code and grounded it in primitive Islamic theology.
Then, with the visit to Australia of the American Protestant preacher, the
Reverend Jerry Falwell, in 1982, the word was more correctly used for his
combination of biblical dogmatism with an absolutist attitude to moral values.
A group called `Toleration-a coalition against fanaticism' sprang into
existence in Sydney in reaction to his visit. In 1984 Jerry Falwell led
a significant faction in the US presidential election, and has been observed
to be moving towards a new kind of American established religion which
endangers the separation of Church and State.
  Originally, the word `fundamentalism' was used simply for an attitude
to the Bible. There is little doubt in the minds of most historians of
Christianity that it is a recent phenomenon, and one which is so at variance
with classical Chistianity that, if we were back in the days of orthodoxy,
it would have to be called a heresy. It came into existence in the late
nineteenth century, and from its inception flourished in the southern states
of the USA. After the First World War it became characteristic of Sydney
Protestantism, as its main weapon in the battle against Roman Catholicism.
The effect of fundamentalism was to give to the Bible the same sort of
authority, based on infallibility, which the Roman Catholic Church had declared
for the Pope in 1870. Both Protestants and Catholics were setting up an
intellectual authority against the invasions of scientific rationalism,
but fundamentalism stepped right into the camp of science by claiming that
the factual statements of the Bible had the same kind of truth as scientific
descriptions, took priority over them, and were `proved' by the methods
of science.
  One reason why biblical fundamentalism flourished in Sydney was that a
form of it had been planted here from the beginning. In 1788 the Wesleyan
revival had thoroughly permeated the working classes in England, and it
was from their lowest levels that the convict founders came. The first
chaplain, the Reverend Richard Johnson, was appointed by the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel. In Manning Clark's words,

[h]is sponsors entertained great hopes for the success of his work, that
he would prove a blessing to lost creatures, and hasten the coming of that
day when the wilderness became a fruitful field, when the heathen would
put off their savageness, and put on the graces of the spirit. To assist
him the Society provided a library of tracts and books...In addition to
Bibles, Books of Common Prayer, and Psalters, Johnson took with him copies
of Osterwald on the necessity for reading the scriptures, Kettlewell's offices
for the penitent, copies of exercises against lying, of cautions to profane
swearers, of exhortions to chastity, of dissuasions from stealing, together
with the most fervent wishes from the board of the Society that the divine
blessing might go with him.

  The Bible was already a symbol of class struggle, and remained so for a
long time wherever there was a deep resentment against the ruling classes.
The historical circumstances meant that it was given an extraordinary position
here as the sole source of religious authority. The convicts and working-class
settlers were going to a place where they had no church, and they lacked
a sufficient sense of derivation from the Church in England to be able to
claim to carry its essence among themselves, unlike the Pilgrim Fathers
in North America. Thus, probably for the first time in its history,
Christianity was planted in a country on the basis of the Bible alone, rather
than on the Bible and the Church, the two traditional pillars.
  Further, the dependence on the Bible was held by people who were largely
illiterate, and made little connection between relying on it and reading
it. Thus began the tradition of making it a magic talisman, no different
from a cross or a set of rosary beads, an unsuitable basis on which to add
a belief, started in the early twentieth century, that its contents consisted
of rational propositions about the physical world. 
  In the United States, the emphasis was not so much on the Bible as a symbol
or magical object as on the Bible as a depository of Christian beliefs that
were said to be fundamental and unshakeable, something against which adherence
to religion could be measured. Its history has been traced by Gabriel Hebert in
his book Fundamentalism and the Church of God. Its formal phase began with
the publication by the Testimony Publishing Company of Chicago, Illinois,
between 1909 and 1915, of three million booklets free of charge to `every
pastor, evangelist, missionary, theological professor, theological student,
Sunday School superintendent, YMCA and YWCA secretary, in the English speaking
world, so far as the addresses of all these can be obtained'.
  The essentials of belief that were called fundamentals in these booklets
were emphatically Protestant; in fact Roman Catholicism was classed with
heresies. They included: the doctrine of the Atonement (that Christ died
vicariosly for sinners); the deity of Christ; the reality of hell and the
devil; the virgin birth of Christ; the second advent. The authority for
these was the Bible, said to be a revelation direct from God, infallible
and inerrant. The treatment of it which was then coming into use as a result
of both Darwinism and the new comparitive literature from the Ancient Near
East was condemned as fallacious if not wicked, because it implied that
the Bible was a record of human development in a particular place at a
particular time, a point of view which was said could not be held side by
side with a belief that it was a direct revelation from God in true form
for all time.
  Fundamentalism rapidly became a bad word, associated with bigotry and
fanaticism, and in 1955 the Reverend John Stott said that he preferred in
its place the term `conservative evangelical'. This label was accepted,
and is still proudly worn by a very large section of the Protestant Church
in Sydney, especially the Anglicans. John Stott himself was among those
considered for the position of Archbishop of Sydney in 1982.
  In their original form, as stated in the series of booklets, the selection
of `fundamentals' had no precedent in the previous creeds of the Christian
Church. The doctrine of Atonement was of course a central tenet of the
Reformation, being one of its weapons against the temporal power of Rome,
for it meant that every person could gain salvation directly by identification
with Christ's death without the intermediacy of a priest. But its meaning
had always included admission into a community, which was entered by means
of the symbolic death of baptism. Without a strong emphasis on Church, the
idea of atonement simply becomes a piece of magical thinking, making no
sense, and this is the form in which these booklets teach it.
  A belief in the second coming of Christ was held in the first century
AD, when they were using a calendar dated from the creation of the world
which was about to reach the year 4000, and under contemporary Pythagorean
influence they believed that a great crisis ought to happen in that year.
Once the Christian era replaced their calendar, the basis for belief in
a second coming was removed, and such expectations moved further and further
to the fringes of the Church.
  Doctrines such as the virgin birth, hell and the devil, were part of the
contemporary popular language of the hellenistic period, and were simply
accepted and to some extent refined by the Church; they never taught them
in opposition to accepted belief, as supernaturalists now try to do; miracles
are no longer a common assumption. Further, there never had been such a
doctrine of the Bible - infallible and inerrant - even in the Reformation. It
was not the detailed information that it contained, but its power as a means
of independence of priests, that made the Protestants hold to it. Luther
stood quite cheerfully in judgement upon it, selecting those parts of the
New Testament he liked and deriding others. The Apostles' Creed contains
no statement about the Bible. The attribution of infallibility to the Bible
seems to be a direct reaction to the doctrine of papal infallibility
promulgated in 1870. In both cases, the hardening of authority was a response
to a loss of actual power.
  The label `evangelical', now associated with fundamentalist belief, has
been removed from its original context of meaning. The evangelical revival
in eighteenth-century England was a recovery of fervour, aroused by the
powerful preaching of men like Wesley and Whitefield. Preaching the gospel
gives the word `evangelical', the gospel being a challenge to personal
commitment to the figure of Christ. Its meaning is discussed in the Bible,
but could be understood without it, being preserved in a continuing community.
The Bible became secondarily connected with the evangelical revival, because
it was the working classes in England who were aroused by it and given the
strength to stand up against the ruling classes, whose advantage was their
education. Schooled in the principles of the Enlightenment, they had reduced
religion to a rational formula which is certainly not found in the Bible.
But the Bible does contain the gospel, the good news, and so it became the
manual of the uneducated in their fight against cold rationalism. Now, however,
the word `evangelical' is used for a process of strict reasoning from an
assumption that the Bible is a lawbook containing a set of absolute
propositions. Enthusiasm and fervour are on the whole distrusted by the
Evangelicals, as shown by their reaction to the charismatic outbreak of the
1970s.
  The best-known product of biblical fundamentalism, still very much current
as a matter of legal, educational and sociological concern, is the doctrine
of creationism, which is opposed to the theory of evolution as an account
of the way species came into existence. The so-called `monkey trial' in
the United States in 1926 dramatised issues which are still being fought
out in their legislation and have now found their way here, with the growth
of fundamentalist schools as part of a new phase of private education. Children
are being taught that God created human beings directly in their present
form, and all species independently, and that it is a matter not only of
science but of personal salvation and moral wholeness that this should be
believed.
  The answer of academic biblical scholars to this and related questions
is derived from both theology and historical records. The accounts of the
creation and flood found in Mesopotamia in the second half of the
nineteenth-century show beyond doubt that they belong to the category of
myth. They are intertwined with the stories of gods, and are a kind of
primitive metaphysics: an attempt to talk about the nature of reality in
terms drawn from human experience. They picture the way things must have
been in the light of the way things are now; for example, since conflict 
between opposing forces leads to a creative synthesis, they pictured the 
mother goddess Tiamat fighting against the hero god Marduk and being 
defeated, with the result that the physical world came into existence. The 
Old Testament is using the same sort of language to put forward a different 
philosophical point of view: that the world is unified, entirely under the 
control of a single god, not the helpless victim of a cosmic dialectic. 
There is every reason to suppose that Genesis is consciously revising and 
purifying an existing creation story in the interests of monotheism and the 
observance of the sabbath. Its concern is with theology and ritual, not with 
natural science.
  Theology has also recognised the place of myth and symbol in theological
language. As soon as we use language at all, we are dealing in images and symbols,
not with things directly.  
                             

</sample>
