<sample>
	<id> D05 </id>
	


	<note> 2005 </note>
	


	<source> Beyond belief: Theosophy in Australia 1779-1939. </source>
	


	<h> To Theosophise Australia </h>
	


	<bl> By Jill Roe </bl>
	

Over seventy Australian theosophists attended the Jubilee celebrations at
Adyar in December 1925 when, it was claimed, the Lord spoke through the
chosen vehicle, Krishnamurti, for the first time. Leadbeater's party returned
in early 1926 hugging the idea that the Coming had begun. They brought with
them the young Peter Finch, abandoned at Adyar by a gallivanting Buddhist
grandmother; and, more auspicious, Annie Besant's loyal lieutenant since
1902, George Arundale, with his beautiful young wife Rukmini.
  Although Arundale had never been to Australia before, he was almost
immediately elected general secretary of the Australian section, on
Leadbeater's recommendation, which post he held from 1926 to 1928. The
delighted and now orderly section presumed, correctly, that exciting days
lay ahead. They had been delivered in Arundale, a Cambridge-educated
Englishman, with glittering theosophical credentials dating back to childhood
acquaintance with HPB herself, twenty years' service in India, including
foundation of the Order of the Star in the East. In 1925 during an exciting
week of clairvoyance in Holland, Arundale had entered, and subsequently
rose to be regionary Indian bishop of, the Liberal Catholic Church. It would
be perfectly proper for his new hosts to address the impressive newcomer
as `Bishop Arundale' or Dr Arundale - honoris causa from the would-be
theosophical world university planned for Madras in 1925 - though he often
appeared as the Rt Rev. Arundale, and liked `Bishop George'.
  Mrs Ransom, in command since 1924, departed gracefully for a new tour
of duty in South Africa with the assurance of an administration ready for
the transformation of Australia into a great theosophic*theosopic community,
which, it speedily emerged, was Arundale's plan of action. Convention responded
keenly to his slogan `theosophise Australia'.
  Initially, `to theosophise Australia' meant doubling membership, increasing
cash flow, putting theosophy `across Australia', and uplifting the nation.
The time had passed for technical discussion of karma and reincarnation.
Arundale announced in exemplary fashion that he had already joined nine
brotherhood movements in Sydney, the League of Nations Union, the Prohibition
Society, the Food Reform League, the Humanitarian Society, the RSPCA, the 
British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection (NSW branch), the Good 
Film League, the Peace Society and the WEA; and agog with such dynamism, 
Convention in April 1926 rushed to maximise good fortune. It heard about 
a new Advance! Australia publishing company and endorsed a plan to transform 
Theosophy in Australia into a monthly magazine. A.E. Bennett, partner in the 
new publishing company, also reported a bold technological initiative: the 
newly developed medium of wireless would be deployed in a proposed theosophical 
broadcasting station at Adyar House, to be linked with the Manor, the Star 
Amphitheatre and St Alban's Liberal Catholic Church, to spread theosophy 
and a first-class program of music and lectures over Australia. The pioneering 
possibilities of a spiritual community in Sydney, mentioned by Leadbeater, 
regained an optimistic glow, now that a maker of theosophical men had arrived. 
The record states primly that all Arundale's plans were endorsed, though what 
happened to the idea of a theosophical museum is not known; and members 
restricted their `terrific enthusiasm' to Australian projects, shelving the 
idea of making the society a base for a world religion, as mooted at the 
Jubilee. 
  In a matter of months, theosophising Australia began in earnest. Advance!
Australia, a political monthly, did not replace Theosophy in Australia,
which continued under the symptomatic name change, The Australian Theosophist,
but the monthly duly appeared, with official backing from the section, in
July 1926, forty-eight pages, sixpence, co-edited by Arundale and South
Australian journalist James Leonard Davidge. A month later, on 23 August
1926, the Theosophical Broadcasting Station Pty Ltd, headed by Arundale,
officially launched Radio 2GB as a `B' class station, that is, financed
by advertising. Atypically for `B' class stations, it was to be resolutely
highbrow. (2GB, in other hands since 1936, is a major commercial broadcaster
in Sydney, to the present day retaining a reputation for thoughtfulness.)
Two new press agencies, Fidelity New Service and the Country Press Agency,
dispensed favourable theosophical information.
  The new general secretary galvanized Bligh Street, now more vital and
bustling than the old Hunter Street building had ever been, with many new
departments of work. Publicity was especially busy, despatching 4000 magazines
per month to influential people nominated by members. Adyar Hall, advertised
as the most beautiful hall in Sydney, attracted substantial bookings, and
provided cultural space for members with artistic abilities: for art displays,
lunch-hour concerts arranged by the Music Lovers' Concert Committee and
given by the Theosophical String Quartet formed to service 2GB, and topical
midday lectures. It was decreed that Wednesday evening lodge meetings
henceforth would revolve around a program of music (the section now had
a musical director, Edward Branscombe, who formed the Adyar Ladies' Choir);
socials; debates, preferably on the lives of great men; and Star meetings.
  The irrepressible Arundale and Australian theosophy awaiting the World
Teacher made the preparation of other sections look simple-minded and staid.
Suppressing doubts about the expensive amphitheatre, undaunted by the closure
of the model school, Australian theosophists rallied, this time to the call
of culture. Never before, and never again, would the Theosophical Society
in Australia assume such a high profile as in the late twenties, the Arundale
phase.
  At first Arundale could not be sure what to make of Australians. But,
as a pupil of Dr Besant, `the greatest statesman the world has at present',
he began by talking: on radio stations, from pulpits, and through the house
journals. Like previous theosophical visitors, he saw a rare type inhabiting
this hospitable land, combining the key theosophical virtue of brotherliness
with a promising pioneering spirit. A young country appealed to Arundale
the theosophic educator. And there were good vibrations. `I feel in the
air of Australia,' he wrote, `a certain intangible something which presages
a wonderful future not yet, except by the idealistic visionary few, contacted
by the people as a whole ... Nowhere in the world, I imagine, should the Great
Teacher win a warmer welcome.'
  Since theosophists never doubted that they were the visionary few, word
that they should now give a lead to Australia was welcome. It was not just
a matter of permeating national life with brotherliness, as first thought,
but of setting true national standards. Arundale's `The Australia Section:
A Vision' had them living in peace, harmony and hygiene in suburban communities
with beautiful libraries and the wireless, preparing to serve their fellows,
inspired by `Christ's immediate presence'. Strenuous work lay ahead of the
lodges, instructed to build up a noble Australian citizenship: `every lodge
and every centre a community'. Theosophical keys must be applied to every
area of life, political, religious, social, educational and industrial. 
Australia, perceived as a melting pot, at a time of political experiment, 
was `open to the influence of great ideals and far-reaching schemes for human
betterment'. 
  The rhetoric improved with use. `It is the task of members of the Order
of the Star in the East and of the Theosophical Society,' continued Arundale,
`to see to it that Australia perseveringly treads the appointed pathway,
for members of these movements are the truest pioneers even in this land
of pioneers.' A Fellowship of Pioneers to celebrate the lives of world
benefactors formed immediately, with Arundale addressing its Anzac Day ceremony
in 1926 (the program included the recessional, chamber music, a reading
from poet John Masefield and the national anthem). Thereafter, Thursday
lunch-hour at Adyar House featured readings from great lives. Advance! 
Australia pamphlets, 3d each, included `A Pebble of Goodwill' and `Theosophy
and an ideal Australia'. While Arundale familiarized himself with Australian
life, and offered more exact strategy, members reminded themselves how small
Australia was compared with India, and basked in `colossal ambition'.
  There were indeed powerful new grounds for hope. With a magazine and a
radio station, the old obstacles of incomprehension and misrepresentation
could be removed. (That hostility derived from the public perception of
theosophy as non-Christian and even anti-Christian, never seemed to be taken
quite seriously.) Also theosophical standards in personal, social and political
life, if explained clearly, would win respect and influence. By 1927 both
Advance!  Australia and 2GB were running well, with the magazine at a print
run of 5000 monthly, and theosophists responded to calls for support for
the station. For the first time, the theosophical claim to public attention
extended beyond the lectern. To put it colloquially, theosophists had come
out.
  What then did a fringe group like that have to offer? As we have seen,
they had considerable resources, wide rather than deep, avowedly alternative
to the mainstream. How far theosophical values in personal, social and
political life represented the promised alternative in the twenties is the
most interesting question of all those raised by the history of theosophy
in Australia.
  The answer is complicated by the fact that theosophy was an esoteric culture.
Even at its most open, in the late 1920's, with sources which make assessment
possible virtually for the first time, the fact remains that by definition
they are still usually incomplete, and at crucial points, unsatisfactory.
Esoteric culture always exists in some sort of relationship to the general,
or exoteric, culture, sharing a common tradition even while interpreting
its basic realities quite differently, so that tense and unstable
juxtapositions are the norm. A neat example of the silences, and the
relationships, which also illustrates how far theosophical values posited
alternative values, emerges in the story of the piece de resistance radio
2GB.
  As noted earlier, the broadcasting idea went to Convention in Easter 1926.
However, Karel van Gelder of Blavatsky lodge was experimenting with
transmission from the Manor as early as 1923; and in 1925 a group of
theosophists had formed a theosophical broadcasting company in Sydney. Like
some spiritualists, notably E.J. Fisk managing director of Amalgamated
Wireless 1916-1944, theosophists readily appreciated the possibilities of
the new medium. Not surprisingly they were quick off the mark in establishing
a station - though not quick enough to claim their first choice of call sign,
2AB, AB for Annie Besant, this call-sign having already been claimed by
Mr A.V. Badger of Neutral Bay. As is now fairly well known, the theosophical
broadcasters therefore had recourse to 2GB, Giordano Bruno, thought to be
a previous incarnation of Annie Besant and an old freethought hero, a
sixteenth-century martyr to `true science'.
  Credit for 2GB probably belongs to Alfred Edward Bennett (1889-1963),
a theosophist since about 1920, who managed the station 1926-1936. One of
the large family of Melbourne schoolmaster George Jesse Bennett, and younger
brother of Lieut.-General Henry Gordon Bennett, A.E. Bennett was an 
accountant who set up in Sydney in 1922, having previously managed
meatworks in Victoria and Western Australia. Arundale, with whom Bennett
was to have a dynamic partnership, gave him the credit, but also implied
that the station was his own initiative, prompted by the discovery that
the infant medium was not a monopoly in Australia as in Britain, and by
personal success lecturing on citizenship over Trades Hall stations in Brisbane
and Sydney:
    I dreamed a regular program of good things, things which would provide
    refined enjoyment, develop public taste and appreciation. Good music,
    not the rubbish we mostly hear, interesting addresses on art, on science,
    on literature, on the great social problems, on the various movements
    working for Australian betterment, on Australian ideals - political,
    religious, social, educational, on international questions, short addresses
    on Theosophy and its application to the problems of life, topical views
    ... such could form the ordinary program.
Publicity for theosophy, scope for theosophical lectures, and a demand for
theosophical literature would all flow from this limitless opportunity.
  Whatever the inspiration, theosophical money and skills were readily to 
hand, and it was astute to be early on the broadcasting scene. The proposal
caused anxiety, not only to the residents of Mosman, fearful of interference
with existing reception from the new masts at the Manor, but also because
the idea of religious broadcasting in a sectarian community frightened liberal
opinion. 
                                                              

</sample>
