Camels, decisions and aeroplanes by Don Campbell General Secretary of the Queensland with Northern NSW Branch  

In one of the smallest but most penetrating of all the parables of Jesus,
He uses the illustration of a camel passing through the eye of a needle
(Luke 18:25). 'It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God.'

Over the years, all sorts of explanations have been made to try to let at
least a few rich men have the chance to get into the Kingdom of God. Some
have suggested that the word for camel was a mistake and it should be a
similar word that means a thick string or small rope. Others have felt the
needle might refer to a small door set in a larger door and sometimes referred
to as the eye of a needle.

There is no real reason for saying any of these ideas is correct. The point
is that Jesus is simply saying that it is impossible to put a camel through
the eye of a needle and so it is impossible for a rich man to enter the
Kingdom of God.

He means, of course, a rich man using his riches. It would apply to a wise
man using his intelligence or a beautiful person using their beauty.

Entry into the Kingdom of God is through faith in Jesus Christ and all He
did. There is no other way!

BUT, Jesus told this parable to a rich man who was not able to put his wealth
and possessions in the proper place. Instead of God being first in his life,
his wealth was!

For people in Australia today this camel business has two main lessons.

  1. People's desire for money and possessions can still stop them from
  entering the Kingdom of God. (By the way, remember that almost all
  Australians [even our very poor] are wealthy beyond the wildest dreams
  of much of the world's population!)

  2. Christians are just as prone to the danger of having money and possessions
  in the wrong place in their scheme of living. This is clear from reading
  the whole passage in which the camel bit is set. (Luke 18)

In fact, in our Australian society the pressure exerted on Christians and
non-Christians to over-emphasize money and possessions is enormous. 

Money and possessions are but part of what we are entrusted with. We have
all sorts of gifts, talents, interests, opportunities and areas of life
to develop that have the potential to be much more satisfying and productive
than mere dollars and cents will allow.

So then we can see how this money/possessions pressure affects our attitude
to ...

 DECISIONS  

Oh dear, this is a sticky subject for so many people. They have such a problem
with making decisions.

Some people find having to choose between Corn Flakes or Weet-Bix at breakfast
almost guarantees nervous tension for the rest of the day.

Yet most decisions should be made easily and carefully. God probably doesn't
really care what cereal we have for breakfast or even if we have a second
cup of tea or not.

If we go to buy a new shirt or dress it's a matter of what we like related
to quality and cost.

And it's the same with buying a car. It's a case of what we need as opposed
to quality, reliability, cost of travel over a period relating to initial
outlay and so on. Of course a car costs more than a shirt or dress. And
a house costs more than a car ...

Our society adds pressure to buy bigger, better and more expensive things.
This may not be what we need in all honesty, but to buy the cheapest may
not in the long run be the wisest.

The agony that so many Christians go through in deciding what to buy is
amazing. And the deadening effect that superannuation has on many people
is almost beyond belief.

YET, they can decide on a marriage partner with little or no hassle.

AND as far as a decision to offer for missionary service - it's no problem.
God doesn't want me for sure because I haven't felt any call to go overseas.

BUT have these same people felt any call to stay here? Or to put it another
way, has God clearly said to you that you are not wanted overseas? So this
leads to the mention of ...

 AEROPLANES  

Quite simply, when we send missionaries overseas or to North Australia they
travel by aeroplane.

Out of all this there is a challenge to spend some time thinking and praying
in two areas.

   1. The Camel Syndrome  

What is your attitude to money and possessions? Really, what place do they
have in your thinking, attitudes and general direction in life. When you
read the incident in Luke Chapter 18 you find the man who was talking to
Jesus couldn't follow Him because his possessions had first  place  in his
life.

   2. Decisions  

Do you agonize over decisions about things that don't really matter and
fail to even think about areas where even a little thought would soon demand
a major decision?

The classic case is, of course, the question about serving God in another
culture!

The question to ask is not 'Lord, should I ...?'

The question is really 'Lord, why not me?'

