Pamplona Baja Norman H. Hart  

Pamplona Baja is one of the many hundreds of 'new' housing developments
(Pueblos Jovenes) that surround Lima and most other cities of Latin America.
People come to the cities in search of a better life than the one they knew
in the mountains. They arrive with only what they carry on their backs and
maybe with their families. If they are lucky these people may know someone
in the city where they can stay for a while until they become oriented.

San Juan de Miraflores, of which Pamplona Baja is a district, is some twenty
years old. Many of the houses are quite soundly constructed, but others
are not and are thereby a risk to health and life. Floors may still be of
dirt while the whole family and its animals may share one room. The poverty
which forces them to live in such conditions also prevents the people from
buying good food and obtaining proper health care. Tuberculosis is a major
killer with 85% of the population affected by the disease to some extent
or other.

In this context the Community House exists in Pamplona Baja. Originally
begun five years ago as a refuge for single mothers, it has grown and changed,
adapting to the needs of the local community. The house is a centre for
worship, Bible study, prayer and fellowship on Sundays and during the week.
It is the office for the social worker, while for the nurse it is a surgery.
It is a site for a leather workshop where young men are taught a trade to
supplement family incomes or to help pay for their tertiary education. It
is the home of two of the community leaders and their families. It is a
school for the adult literacy programme, where twenty to thirty ladies learn
to read and write Spanish which is not their native language. The centre
also runs a kindergarten for thirty children of the poorest families, a
Sunday school and a youth group.

The Rev Tony Michael acts as a pastor for the community; his wife Priscilla,
in conjunction with Epifania and Esperanza, co-ordinates the social work.
The community has opted to provide sustained care for individuals and their
families, not just a supplement to government services. About twenty patients
are provided with drugs for T.B. under the supervision of a volunteer doctor
who visits when required. Priscilla and Epifania go regularly to twelve
of the fifty government schools in the area to teach basic hygiene related
to T.B., typhoid, venereal disease, drug addiction and sex education. The
centre helps to find employment, visits community members in Lima jails,
advises people on how to deal with government departments, how to care
for themselves and their families and helps them to realise that they are
sons and daughters of God and important to him.

Where possible, the centre also helps in first aid and a limited supply
of drugs for emergencies and severely poor people. When available, food
supplements are given to patients and their families. Milk is given to
kindergarten children. Clothing is provided if available and necessary.
The depression and distress which are a natural consequence of the life-style
and illness in the Pueblo Joven means that there must be frequent and often
lengthy visitation to support patients and their families. Often there are
deaths and some families can lose members at such an alarming rate that
there is little prospect of a third generation. Here the Church is trying
to help people survive. This means that the gospel in Peru must be wholistic
- it must relate to the whole person. Pamplona Baja has chosen this course.

While in country areas some missionaries have undertaken the task of preparing
scripture and liturgies in Aymara and Quechua, in Lima Spanish
is the lingua franca and any progress the people make must be in that language.
Most would deny any knowledge of an indian language because that is seen
as a social stigma. The missionary is usually using Spanish as a second
language also and in these circumstances misunderstandings can often occur
making communication a trial but also a joy in learning together.

Pamplona Baja has many needs - a library for use by students in the district;
drugs for T.B. patients at three hundred and fifty dollars a year for each
one; Bibles for the growing Christian community. 
   
