<subsample>
	<id> D11a </id>
	  


	<source> On The Move - January 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Models of ministry </h>
	


	<bl> by George Browning </bl>
	

When the day of Pentecost came, the disciples were gathered together in
one place when they suddenly experienced a transforming power which was
to change their whole way of behaving. 

What did in fact transform them? Was it the cross itself? Was it an empty
tomb? Was it meeting the risen Jesus? Was it Pentecost?

It was probably a combination of all of these, especially viewed with the
benefit of hindsight. In any case their experience of what it meant to
be a church was quite different from the models they had perhaps imagined
while Jesus was alive.

One of these models is seen in Mark 20:20 where James and John and their
mother had a definite model in mind of what it would be like to serve the
Kingdom of God. This model was obviously unacceptable to Jesus with its
emphasis upon privilege, power and status, but do not many of our parishes
operate from this model?

It appears that Judas had another model in mind, equally unacceptable to
Jesus. While we may not see his model being used anywhere in the church
in Australia we certainly observe it in a rather horrific way in the march
of Islam in many parts of the world, for was not Judas' model one of
revolution and conversion by coercion?

I would like us to examine some of the possible models which are used,
consciously or unconsciously, in parishes throughout Australia today. As
I present these models I am conscious that there are many other variations
and that no one will necessarily be the model from which you are working,
but I hope they will assist you in asking honestly where you are at, and
help you explore where it is that you would like to be.


	<h> I  THE MODEL OF THE `KING` </h>
	

In this model the rector or vicar is totally dominant and puts his stamp
completely upon the parish. It is most likely that he will totally disregard
any possibility that the parish had a story of its own before he came and
will insist that his story is the one which will dominate. The model assumes
that he has all the gifts and that in some way the Holy Spirit works through
him to others.

The model denies the possibility that others can reflect the light of the
gospel in `different colours'. It is unlikely that renewal can take place
through this model. Unfortunately the model is all too frequently observed.
One parish priest at his induction last month announced that the parish
would now return to the truth of Catholic experience and that he would dictate
what would, or would not, be allowed to continue. He also laid down as 
unnegotiable the title by which he was to be known.

The model has some attractions about it. It offers security; there are no
risks. You know exactly where you stand and the path to salvation is clearly
laid down.


	<h>2  THE MANAGING DIRECTOR </h>
	

I have a hunch that this is probably the most popular model at a parish
and diocesan level. It is popular because it can give the impression that
the people of God are being nurtured, that there is mutual ministry, while
in fact there is none. It may even be a more dangerous model than the first
because people can be misled into thinking that there is real mutuality
when there is not.

In this model the rector is still basically in charge of dictating the `story',
and people are on the whole given jobs to do rather than sharing ministry.
There is no real sense of mutual accountability and jobs are handed out
largely at the rector's initiative and discretion. There is unlikely to
be mutuality in decision making.

Because the model is geared towards tasks being done rather than the building
up of people, it is likely that jobs will be handed out without much
consideration being given to appropriate motivational gifts. We have in
this case the danger of people feeling guilty and/or hurt when the given
task is rejected or completed badly.

This model encourages people to `take a holiday' for a while when they perceive
their usefulness in terms of the task performed rather than in the giving
of themselves.

It is probable that in this model little is really being done in terms of
mutual ministry or in renewal.


	<h>3  A MODEL OF MUTUAL MINISTRY - BASED UPON TASKS RATHER THAN GIFTS </h>
	

This model of mutual ministry, or one like it, operates in a number of
parishes. It is based upon function rather than gift and has the rector
still centrally placed in the model. (Is it possible in Anglicanism to have
a model where he is not centrally placed?)

This model is a fluid one, and rather than answering questions it keeps
asking other ones.

- With how many people is it possible to work in a meaningful way?

- If there is a ministry team should they be `licensed', if so by whom and
for how long? Does it include a contract, and who may alter it?

- Who discerns the areas of ministry?

- At this particular stage of the life of the church in Australia should
those who are part of the main team be deacons? Can you be a deacon and
cease being a deacon?

- What `standing' do those have who are not part of the main team?

- What areas of mutuality should be expected of those who belong together
in this way? Prayer? Fellowship? Teaching? Social interaction? etc.


	<h> 4  A MODEL FOR MUTUAL MINISTRY - BASED UPON MOTIVATIONAL GIFTS RATHER THAN TASKS </h>
	

I offer this model to you as one who is not a card carrying charismatic.
I am not even a real clapper or hugger. I also offer this model being very
conscious that I am being most simplistic and that I am introducing an element
here and thereby seeming to imply that that element is absent from other
models, i.e. the work of the Holy Spirit. This is plainly untrue, but I have
chosen to draw the model in this way for the purpose of contrast with the
hope that you may take from any or all of these models and create your own
which you may feel will assist you in the renewal of your parish.

In this model I am suggesting that the base principle is not task but person,
and that in the choice or call of a person one may well look for that
particular gift that brings balance to the whole. I have a hunch that the
most unpopular gift is that of prophecy - speaking the truth - and hence
there are very few prophets amongst parish clergy! It may be that you will
consciously choose a mercy giver as the chairman of the pastoral care program,
but in so doing you will take great care to make sure that within this team
there is an enabler, a teacher etc.

It is not that a person has a monopoly of one of these gifts and none of
the others, but it is true that each of us is likely to major in one
and be less gifted in the others. I have a hunch that most parishes prefer
exhorters as rectors, but it may be that the parish has grown strong enough
in its mutual ministry to consciously seek a prophet, or perhaps on the
other hand a mercy giver and not expect a prophet or teacher.

Whichever model we use, we should be conscious of it, be happy to sit with
it, and `own' the implications of it.


The Venerable George Browning is the Archdeacon of the Central Coast in
the Anglican Diocese of Newcastle, N.S.W. This article is extracted, with
his permission, from a much longer paper entitled `God's Family at Home:
renewal and enrichment of parish ministry'. In the presentation of the paper
at a gathering of Anglican clergy the various models were presented in diagram
form.


</subsample>
