Of volleyball and leadership By Pat Jenkins  

My experience of playing volleyball, limited as it had been, had helped me
evolve a set of rules which I felt minimized my humiliation on those occasions
when participation was unavoidable. These rules included such basics as:
position yourself as inconspicuously as possible, quietly step away from
the ball when you see it coming so it is not quite as blatantly obvious
that you are the one responsible for the lost point, call to other team 
members "yours" whenever possible, make many jokes about anything else to
keep people's minds off the game at hand, apologise when you misdirect the
ball as if such occurrences were an unusual surprise, excuse yourself for
an important job awaiting you when the revelation of your total inadequacy
is imminent etc. etc. You know, the usual stuff.

Then last year, at our Annual National Conference for S.U. schools staff,
volleyball, unfortunately, became the filler of the breaks between sessions.
My rule of thumb (avoid being seen on the court), which supersedes all of
the above rules, was brought into play.

But one day the most utterly awful thing occurred. I was told that some
hopelessly misguided woman had challenged the male staff to a men versus
women game the following day, and numbers being what they were, they needed
me to play. I felt sick, my heart pounded, my palms sweated. The only thing
worse than looking individually foolish is to be part of a group which looks
collectively foolish. Please Lord, could we be raptured now? 

And then Chris O'Gorman, from Qld. staff, stepped in. In the growing dark
of dusk she gathered us on the courts and gave us some coaching. First,
a few basic rules - you may do this, you need to do that, this is illegal.
Then some tips: the only call is "mine", don't apologise, capitalize on
the male tendency to hog the ball. Then some practical suggestions: hold
your hand like this, hit the ball with this arm motion, play as a team in
this way. Then some practice: form yourselves in a semi circle, hit the
ball back to me in this way, then back to the next person, then in this
other way. Soon my heart palpitations were at a more manageable 
level.

If the aim of the match was to have it be of the highest standard possible
during this staff gathering, then I had no place being on the court.
She should have told me to resort to my usual "preparing tonight's session",
or "need to have a deep and meaningful with..." etc. But if (as indeed it
was) the aim was to have participation, and to improve the playing ability
and hence, enjoyment, of each individual player, then I definitely needed
to play. That only had a point if I had a coach's guidance. But if, then,
I experienced the pleasure of following her serving tips and the satisfaction
of winning a point, maybe later in the year I would play again, this time
without the coach around. Hence the "nett" amount of participation/improvement
in volleyball by staff would increase. More so than if just the experienced
players had got further practice in the big match. So, I was part of the
team.

The next day the prayed-for tornado did not hit and we were forced, instead,
to play volleyball. The first game we lost 15/3, the second 15/8, the third
15/12. My relief at the game's conclusion, although heartfelt, was actually
less heartfelt than ever before. Because I had seen in Chris a superb leader
in action. When the ball came her way she handled it quietly and powerfully.
But mostly, her role had been to allocate, guide, train and review - all
of which had the effect of simply inspiring confidence - and that was enough
to transform our (my) performance.

And that's the aim of the Leadership Conferences which we in the schools
area of Scripture Union NSW run each May holidays: to provide an environment
where confidence is inspired and leadership skills are developed amongst
our Inter School Christian Fellowship students and amongst the teams which
lead them. There used to be just one conference, where the high school ISCF
kids who were good at leading, got better. That was valuable. But now there
are 8 conferences - and so vast numbers of the delegates who come don't
have much background in leadership or teaching at all. A bit like me and
volleyball. But, with conferences which are carefully planned, to maximise
participation by students, and to provide guidance, training and evaluation,
students and team members go home much more confident and skilled than when
they arrive.

Always, there were the basic rules: God is sovereign, lean on him. You're
not alone in your school. Use the power of the Holy Spirit within you. Spend
time daily in prayer and Bible Study.

Then, team members do some of the "performing" - Jeff Fletcher and Cailey
Moore at the Conference in Tamworth directed by Helen McNab gave a powerful
and moving mime about temptation and loyalty in relationships. This was
a prelude to their evening devoted to discovering biblical principles relevant
to dating. David Griffin role modelled creative learning exercises in the
Bible Studies he led at Fitzroy Falls (Director, Elizabeth Taylor) with
paper aeroplanes delegates made - one wing representing "lips", the other
"life". Make a plane without either wing and, no matter how good that wing,
the plane won't fly. Make a plane with lips and life wings and ... whammo!

And then came the tips. Martin Cowling led the "Presenting Yourself Up Front"
skills workshops at a Mt. Victoria Conference - Director, Rob Maidment.
And with it came the participation - Pupils who elected that interest area
of Martin's were then responsible for running all the evening sessions -
including selection of music, prayer, telling about individual school groups,
book reviews etc. And there were the practice runs. Wayne Deeth took this
training a step further at the Fitzroy Falls Conference, and there, utilising
video equipment, students were able to analyse their own annoying mannerisms,
distracting habits etc. Their eagerness for evaluation after their turns
up front reflected a new confidence and determination to take this role
seriously - and woe betide any team member who failed to meet the preparation
criteria established by the group as required!

There were also the practical suggestions - delegates were guided in programme
planning, resource utilisation, & choice of ISCF meeting ideas. Roslyn
Johnston, at the Morisset Conference - director, Neville Hatton - produced
a superb 8 page booklet on planning an ISCF programme. She led kids through
workshops which had them scurrying for drama group phone numbers, Bible
Study references, Input magazine back issues etc.

And over and over again was the actual execution - learning by doing, learning
by doing, learning by doing. If the aim was to have top quality "presentations"
at conference, only the experienced teachers would be up front. But it wasn't.
The aim was to increase participation so that, having worked under close
guidance and experienced the "I can do it" feeling, students would return
home and be better equipped to initiate and take responsibility there.

I visited four of these conferences and will go to a fifth in the Hunter
Region (which we put off till the August holidays so as not to compete with
the Evangelism Explo Newcastle held in May). Jon Tigwell visited the other
three.

At my very last visit, the inevitable occurred: they organised a volleyball
match for the break between Bible Studies and research (Wombat) groups,
and I was invited to play.

Six months had elapsed since national conference. The sweaty palms, beating
heart, desperate futile searching for someone who surely needed me for deep
and meaningful conversation - all returned. With a quietly muttered "Chris
O'Gorman, where are you?" I meekly walked onto the court. And you know what?
Although we lost dismally (15-2, 15-4, 15-7), somewhere amongst those smaller
scores is a point I won! I was elated.

And back in the high schools all over NSW there are literally hundreds of
Christian kids who have returned from Leadership Conferences and who are
participating in I.S.C.F. groups in their schools. They are removed from
the team members who encouraged and guided them. And they may still get
nervous, forget things, lack sufficient preparation, get things mixed up.
But they are bravely (a) doing their bit, and (b) seeing far more fruit
for their efforts than ever before. I thank God for that.

