Staff news FAREWELL John Smartt - Western Ribbon  

We said goodbye to John in May as he moved on to take up a position with
Mayne Nickless. John has done a great job for Scripture Union, firstly in
Darwin and then in the Western Ribbon working from an office in Penrith.
`Thank you John and Tracy for all the hard work you put into your time with
Scripture Union. We wish you God's richest blessing for the future.'
John hopes to continue to help us in various ways.

 Peter Walker - Communications Co-ordinator  

After nearly six years on the SU staff, Peter left at the end of May to
take the position of Communication Co-Ordinator with the Energy Commission.
Peter will be a great loss to us in Chalmers Street as of course he was
responsible for many of the publications that come to you from SU House.
(If you think this issue of SU News doesn't flow as well as usual, you now
know why!) Many of you will have met Peter at SU events and seen the result
of his photography sometimes to your surprise. Peter will continue to help
us particularly as Mission adviser for SUFM's in January.

 PLEASE PRAY  

Please pray for Marion Thorn, secretary for the Communications Department
as she has been very unwell for the last three months and after a major
operation is continuing under treatment from home. Pray for Marion and her
husband, Bob, and their two children.

 CONGRATULATIONS  

To Ralph and Diana Fairbairn on the birth of a second daughter, Heidi. Ralph
is the Gift Department Co-ordinator for SU.
To Joanne and Gary Akehurst on their marriage, May 31st. Joanne is the
receptionist at SU House.

 WELCOME  

GUILIO LESCHI, MANLY WARRINGAH LOCAL SCHOOLS WORKER.
Guilio joined the staff in April to work 2 days a week in the Manly Warringah
area. Guilio will work closely with the Manly Warringah area development
group and their chairman, Max Lindsay. The area are working hard at raising
the entire team support needed for Guilio and are excited at the potential
in their appointment. 

