Another Paraclete  

  No matter how many books or articles we read on the subject the Holy Spirit
is always more difficult to picture than God the Father or God the Son.
But we get some help from today's Gospel.
  Jesus Christ speaks of sending "another Advocate". "If you love me you
will keep my commandments. I shall ask the Father and he will give you another
advocate to be with you forever".
  We really need a combination of words to describe the Holy Spirit and
His role. There is the Greek word Paraclete which means the person who is
called to the side of one in need of assistance, particularly in legal
processes. So from that we have words like advocate, intercessor, defender,
mediator, helper. Then there are other words like teacher, consoler, friend.
The Holy Spirit is all that and more.
  Today's Gospel also gives us another clue. By speaking of another Advocate,
Jesus seems to imply that He is the first Advocate and now there will be
another like Himself. So we can conclude that what Jesus did for His friends
during His life on earth, the new Advocate will continue to do for the
followers of Christ down through the ages. The Gospel (Jn 14) tells us He
is the spirit of truth ... that He will teach the disciples all truth and
bring to their minds what Jesus taught them ... He will bear witness to Jesus.
  So we can be sure the Holy Spirit is present in the Church today as He
has been for the past more than 1900 years. He is teaching and guiding the
Church enabling it to come to an ever deeper understanding and a more complete
grasp of the message of Christ. We can be sure He is still inspiring the
followers of Christ to remain steadfast in their faith, encouraging and
strengthening them to live by Christ's teaching and bring His message to
the world.
  The work of the Spirit is vividly demonstrated in today's First Reading
which describes the wonderful events of Pentecost. Although the apostles
had listened to Christ and seen Him do marvellous things, they really did
not understand Him or His mission. But with the coming of the Spirit everything
fell into place. They knew Christ as they had never known Him before and
wanted to tell the world about Him.
  Today we pray that the Holy Spirit will "continue to work in the world
through the hearts of all who believe" (Opening Prayer).

                                               Wm. H. Stinson, C.SS.R.  

