How to be filled with God's spirit by Dick Innes  

How could one person possibly fill Madison Square Gardens with 20,000 people
every night for four months? `Impossible,' thought a lovely Broadway actress,
and the only reason she attended Billy Graham's New York Crusade was to
find out how he did it.
  This actress had a long-standing illness that she described as `a terrible
cavity somewhere in the abdominal region'. Fearing she had some dreaded disease,
she had been examined by several doctors and had insisted on exploratory
surgery. Not one doctor could find anything physically wrong with her.
  But that night, as she sat listening to Billy Graham and trying to be
as inconspicuous as possible, without warning she was gripped with this
dreaded `emptiness' more severely than ever.
  Suddenly she realized that its cause wasn't physical at all. It was
spiritual. So she responded to the invitation to receive Jesus Christ into
her heart as personal Lord and Saviour - and her overwhelming emptiness
vanished, never to return.
  Not all emptiness has a spiritual cause by any means, but much of the
emptiness which plagues modern society does.
  People are not only physical and emotional beings with a need for food
and friends, but they are also spiritual beings with a need for God.
  Without Christ in our lives we are spiritually dead, but when we receive
him as personal Lord and Saviour, we become spiritually alive (2 Corinthians
5:17), are immediately indwelt by God's Holy Spirit, and so belong to the
body of all true Christians. As the Apostle Paul said, `For we were all
baptized (immersed) by one Spirit into one body...and are all given the
one Spirit' (1 Corinthians 12:13).
  Every true Christian, therefore, has God's Spirit within. But God doesn't
only want us to be merely indwelt by, but filled with his Spirit. His
injunction is to `go on being filled with the Spirit' (Ephesians 5:18, literal
translation), which is a continuous, daily experience.
  When we are filled with God's Spirit, he fills the spiritual vacuum in
our life and gives us God's power:to help us overcome temptation and sin
(Romans 8:12); to produce in us the fruit of the Spirit, which is love,
joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and
self-control (Galatians 5:22,23); and to make us effective witnesses for
Jesus Christ (Acts 1:8).
  How, then, can we be filled with the Holy Spirit?
  First, desire and faith. As with all of God's gifts, so is the filling
of the Holy Spirit. We need to truly want it and we need to believe that
God will give it to us as he said he would.
  Jesus said, `If any one thirsts (that is, strongly desires), let him come
to me and drink. He who believes in me, as the Scripture said, "Out of his
innermost being shall flow rivers of living water." By this he spoke of
the Spirit, whom those who believe in him were to receive' (John 7:37-39).
  Second, commitment. If my heart is filled with anxiety, anxiety will control
my life. But if my heart is filled with God's Spirit, his love, joy and
peace will control my life.
  What our heart and mind are filled with is what controls us. And what
we are filled with is what we are committed to. If we are committed to
ourselves, we will be controlled by our selfish desires plus our anxieties,
fears, and so on. But if we are committed to Christ, and make him Lord of
our everyday lives, we will be controlled by his Spirit plus the fruits
of the Spirit.
  Third, openness. In a very real sense, the issue isn't how much of the
Holy Spirit I have, but how much of me does the Holy Spirit have? As we
have said, when we receive Christ as Lord and Saviour, we are given the
Holy Spirit in all his fullness. The difficulty is that most of us don't
know how to open ourselves to the fullness or filling of the Holy Spirit.
  For instance, if I am a closed, defensive person, or have any areas of
my life that are repressed - areas of my inner self out of which I have
shut both myself and others - I automatically shut God and his Spirit out
too. Therefore, to be fully filled with God's Spirit, I need to learn to
be fully open about my secret thoughts, feelings and motives - to myself,
to at least one other person and to God.
  Fourth, personal honesty. The Holy Spirit is also known as the Spirit
of Truth. Thus, to be filled with the Spirit of Truth, we need to be truthful
with ourselves and with God. If we have committed our life to Jesus and
dedicated our heart and mind to his control but still don't have his love,
joy, and peace, it isn't because God or his Spirit have left us. It is often
because of barriers in us that block the flow of God's Spirit.
  These barriers are often unresolved feelings of fear, inadequacy, false
or real guilt, hurt, resentment, and so on which we have either consciously
or unconsciously hidden or repressed. These are the pains that keep us focussed
on ourself, which in turn block out God's Spirit. Therefore, if I don't
have as much of God's love, joy and peace as I'd like to have, I need to
admit this and be truthful and courageous about facing and resolving my
inner negative feelings.
  Fifth, removing barriers. Those barriers that block God's Spirit usually
have their roots in an impaired relationship or a hurtful experience from
our past. To experience God's love, joy and peace, it is necessary that
impaired relationships be put right and any unresolved feelings of hurt,
anger or resentment dealt with fully and confessed to either a trusted friend,
minister or counsellor, as James advises (James 5:16), or to a specific
person if he or she is involved (Matthew 5:23,24), and always to God, who
has promised to forgive us (1 John 1:9).
  Sixth, obedience. Another requirement for the filling of the Holy Spirit
is living in harmony with, and obedience to, the Word and will of God. As
Peter said, the Holy Spirit is given to those who obey God (Acts 5:32).
  Finally, abiding. Jesus said, `I am the vine, you are the branches. He
who abides in me and I in him will bear much fruit; for apart from me you
can do nothing' (John 15:5).
  Christ's allegory is a good illustration of how to have a fruitful life.
As we, the branches, abide in Christ the vine by spending time with him
(daily studying his Word, praying, and living in obedience to him), so the
sap, or Holy Spirit, flows from Christ through us the branches, and fruit
is the natural outcome.
  The good news is that we don't have to struggle to produce God's fruit. 
We can't anyhow, and if we try to the fruit is unreal. That's what Christ
meant when he said without him we can do nothing. Only his Spirit within
can produce his fruit without.
  As we commit our lives in full surrender to Jesus Christ, abide in him,
and resolve the barriers, his Spirit, already dwelling in every Christian,
fills us and his fruits of love, joy and peace come automatically.
                  
