<sample>
	<id> D17 </id>
	


	<source> The Promise of World Peace. A Statement by The Universal House of Justice </source>
	


	<note> 2028 words </note>
	


	<h> The promise of world peace </h>
	

		                
	<h> I </h>
	

The endowments which distinguish the human race from all other forms of
life are summed up in what is known as the human spirit; the mind is its
essential quality. These endowments have enabled humanity to build
civilizations and to prosper materially. But such accomplishments alone
have never satisfied the human spirit, whose mysterious nature inclines
it towards transcendence, a reaching towards an invisible realm, towards
the ultimate reality, that unknowable essence of essences called God. The
religions brought to mankind by a succession of spiritual luminaries have
been the primary link between humanity and that ultimate reality, and have
galvanized and refined mankind's capacity to achieve spiritual success
together with social progress.
  No serious attempt to set human affairs aright, to achieve world peace,
can ignore religion. Man's perception and practice of it are largely the
stuff of history. An eminent historian described religion as a &quot;faculty
of human nature.&quot; That the perversion of this faculty has contributed to
much of the confusion in society and the conflicts in and between individuals
can hardly be denied. But neither can any fair-minded observer discount
the preponderating influence exerted by religion on the vital expressions
of civilization. Furthermore, its indispensability to social order has
repeatedly been demonstrated by its direct effect on laws and morality.
  Writing of religion as a social force, Baha'u'llah said: &quot;Religion is
the greatest of all means for the establishment of order in the world and
for the peaceful contentment of all that dwell therein.&quot; Referring to the
eclipse or corruption of religion, he wrote: &quot;Should the lamp of religion
be obscured, chaos and confusion will ensue, and the lights of fairness,
of justice, of tranquillity and peace cease to shine.&quot; In an enumeration
of such consequences the Baha'i writings point out that the &quot;perversion
of human nature, the degradation of human conduct, the corruption and
dissolution of human institutions, reveal themselves, under such circumstances,
in their worst and most revolting aspects. Human character is debased,
confidence is shaken, the nerves of discipline are relaxed, the voice of
human conscience is stilled, the sense of decency and shame is obscured,
conceptions of duty, of solidarity, of reciprocity and loyalty are distorted,
and the very feeling of peacefuless, of joy and of hope is gradually
extinguished.&quot;
  If, therefore, humanity has come to a point of paralyzing conflict it
must look to itself, to its own negligence, to the siren voices to which
it has listened, for the source of the misunderstandings and confusion
perpetrated in the name of religion. Those who have held blindly and selfishly
to their particular orthodoxies, who have imposed on their votaries erroneous
and conflicting interpretations of the pronouncements of the Prophets of
God, bear heavy responsibility for this confusion - a confusion compounded
by the artificial barriers erected between faith and reason, science and
religion. For from a fair-minded examination of the actual utterances of
the Founders of the great religions, and of the social milieus in which
they were obliged to carry out their missions, there is nothing to support
the contentions and prejudices deranging the religious communities of mankind
and therefore all human affairs.
  The teaching that we should treat others as we ourselves would wish to
be treated, an ethic variously repeated in all the great religions, lends
force to this latter observation in two particular respects: it sums up
the moral attitude, the peace-inducing aspect, extending through these
religions irrespective of their place or time of origin; it also signifies
an aspect of unity which is their essential virtue, a virtue mankind in
its disjointed view of history has failed to appreciate.
  Had humanity seen the Educators of its collective childhood in their
true character, as agents of one civilizing process, it would no doubt have
reaped incalculably greater benefits from the cumulative effects of their
successive missions. This, alas, it failed to do.
  The resurgence of fanatical religious fervor occurring in many lands cannot
be regarded as more than a dying convulsion. The very nature of the violent
and disruptive phenomena associated with it testifies to the spiritual
bankruptcy it represents. Indeed, one of the strangest and saddest features
of the current outbreak of religious fanaticism is the extent to which,
in each case, it is undermining not only the spiritual values which are
conducive to the unity of mankind but also those unique moral victories
won by the particular religion it purports to serve.
  However vital a force religion has been in the history of mankind, and
however dramatic the current resurgence of militant religious fanaticism,
religion and religious institutions have, for many decades, been viewed
by increasing numbers of people as irrelevant to the major concerns of the
modern world. In its place they have turned either to the hedonistic pursuit
of material satisfactions or to the following of man-made ideologies designed
to rescue society from the evident evils under which it groans. All too
many of these ideologies, alas, instead of embracing the concept of the
oneness of mankind and promoting the increase of concord among different
peoples, have tended to deify the state, to subordinate the rest of mankind
to one nation, race or class, to attempt to suppress all discussion and
interchange of ideas, or to callously abandon starving millions to the
operations of the market system that all too clearly is aggravating the
plight of the majority of mankind, while enabling small sections to live
in a condition of affluence scarcely dreamed of by our forebears.
  How tragic is the record of the substitute faiths that the worldly-wise
of our age have created. In the massive disillusionment of entire populations
who have been taught to worship at their altars can be read history's
irreversible verdict on their value. The fruits these doctrines have produced,
after decades of an increasingly unrestrained exercise of power by those
who owe their ascendancy in human affairs to them, are the social and economic
ills that blight every region of our world in the closing years of the
twentieth century. Underlying all these outward afflictions is the spiritual
damage reflected in the apathy that has gripped the mass of the peoples
of all nations and by the extinction of hope in the hearts of deprived and
anguished millions.
  The time has come when those who preach the dogmas of materialism, whether
of the east or the west, whether of capitalism or socialism, must give account
of the moral stewardship they have presumed to exercise. Where is the &quot;new
world&quot; promised by these ideologies? Where is the international peace to
whose ideals they proclaim their devotion? Where are the breakthroughs into
new realms of cultural achievement produced by the aggrandizement of this
race, of that nation or of a particular class? Why is the vast majority
of the world's peoples sinking ever deeper into hunger and wretchedness
when wealth on a scale undreamed of by the Pharaohs, the Caesars, or even
the imperialist powers of the nineteenth century is at the disposal of the
present arbiters of human affairs?
  Most particularly, it is in the glorification of material pursuits, at
once the progenitor and common feature of all such ideologies, that we find
the roots which nourish the falsehood that human beings are incorrigibly
selfish and aggressive. It is here that the ground must be cleared for the
building of a new world fit for our descendants.
  That materialistic ideals have, in the light of experience, failed to
satisfy the needs of mankind calls for an honest acknowledgment
that a fresh effort must now be made to find the solutions to the agonizing
problems of the planet. The intolerable conditions pervading society bespeak
a common failure of all, a circumstance which tends to incite rather than
relieve the entrenchment on every side. Clearly, a common remedial effort
is urgently required. It is primarily a matter of attitude. Will humanity
continue in its waywardness, holding to outworn concepts and unworkable
assumptions? Or will its leaders, regardless of ideology, step forth and,
with a resolute will, consult together in a united search for appropriate
solutions?
  Those who care for the future of the human race may well ponder this advice.
&quot;If long-cherished ideals and time-honored institutions, if certain social
assumptions and religious formulae have ceased to promote the welfare of
the generality of mankind, if they no longer minister to the needs of a
continually evolving humanity, let them be swept away and relegated to
the limbo of obsolescent and forgotten doctrines. Why should these, in
a world subject to the immutable law of change and decay, be exempt from
the deterioration that must needs overtake every human institution? For
legal standards, political and economic theories are solely designed to
safeguard the interests of humanity as a whole, and not humanity to be
crucified for the preservation of the integrity of any particular law or
doctrine.&quot;

			        
	<h> II </h>
	

Banning nuclear weapons, prohibiting the use of poison gases, or outlawing
germ warfare will not remove the root causes of war. However important such
practical measures obviously are as elements of the peace process, they
are in themselves too superficial to exert enduring influence. Peoples are
ingenious enough to invent yet other forms of warfare, and to use food,
raw materials, finance, industrial power, ideology, and terrorism to subvert
one another in an endless quest for supremacy and dominion. Nor can the
present massive dislocation in the affairs of humanity be resolved through
the settlement of specific conflicts or disagreements among nations. A
genuine universal framework must be adopted.
  Certainly, there is no lack of recognition by national leaders of the
worldwide character of the problem, which is self-evident in the mounting
issues that confront them daily. And there are the accumulating studies
and solutions proposed by many concerned and enlightened groups as well
as by agencies of the United Nations, to remove any possibility of ignorance
as to the challenging requirements to be met. There is, however, a paralysis
of will; and it is this that must be carefully examined and resolutely dealt
with. This paralysis is rooted, as we have stated, in a deep-seated conviction
of the inevitable quarrelsomeness of mankind, which has led to the reluctance
to entertain the possibility of subordinating national self-interest to
the requirements of world order, and in an unwillingness to face courageously
the far-reaching implications of establishing a united world authority.
It is also traceable to the incapacity of largely ignorant and subjugated
masses to articulate their desire for a new order in which they can live
in peace, harmony and prosperity with all humanity.
  The tentative steps towards world order, especially since World War II,
give hopeful signs. The increasing tendency of groups of nations to formalize
relationships which enable them to cooperate in matters of mutual interest
suggests that eventually all nations could overcome this paralysis. The
Association of South East Asian Nations, the Caribbean Community and Common
Market, the Central American Common Market, the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance, the European Communities, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity, the Organization of American States, the
South Pacific Forum - all the joint endeavors represented by such
organizations prepare the path to world order.
  The increasing attention being focused on some of the most deep-rooted
problems of the planet is yet another hopeful sign. Despite the obvious
shortcomings of the United Nations, the more than two score declarations
and conventions adopted by that organization, even where governments have
not been enthusiastic in their commitment, have given ordinary people a
sense of a new lease on life. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and the similar measures concerned with eliminating all forms of discrimination
based on race, sex or religious belief; upholding the rights of the child;
protecting all persons against being subjected to torture; eradicating hunger
and malnutrition; using scientific and technological progress in the interest
of peace and the benefit of mankind - all such measures, if courageously
enforced and expanded, will advance the day when the specter of war will
have lost its power to dominate international relations.



</sample>
