<subsample>
	<id> E02a </id>
	


	<source> Good Housekeeping - June 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Great ways to make your kitchen work </h>
	

It doesn't matter whether it's large or small, old or new, there are ways
of making your kitchen work for you ... and it need not cost a fortune.

&quot;Not enough space&quot; is probably the most common complaint people make about
their kitchens - and room size isn't always a contributing factor. Indeed,
even in a large kitchen with, apparently, plenty of cupboard space you may
find that there is storage galore for seldom-needed items but nowhere to 
put the many things that are in everyday use.
  The secret of a workable kitchen is not how much space you have but how you
use it. The pictures on these pages show how two enthusiastic cooks created
the sort of kitchens the rest of us dream about ... but like so many great
successes, most of the ideas are surprisingly simple. Take a good look:
the solution to your kitchen problem could be right here.
  We also give you advice on basic planning, plus quick tips on making
your kitchen more efficient and pleasant whether you're building anew or
just making do.


	<h> Walking to work </h>
	

Many people covet a large kitchen but, unless it is sensibly planned, that
extra space can equal extra footwork - and a tired cook.
  A good kitchen layout should enable the storage, preparation, cooking
and serving of food to be carried out safely and conveniently.
  The aim then is for the fridge, freezer and food cupboards to be close
to the preparation area (usually the sink and adjacent work surfaces) and
this preparation area should not be too far from the stove. There must be
a clear work surface next to the stove where you can set down hot pans and
serve the food.
  If you imagine a line linking the storage, preparation and cooking areas
you have what is known as the work triangle. For optimum efficiency, the
total length of this line should not be less than 3.5m (the kitchen will
be too cramped) and not more than 6.5m (you'll spend too much energy walking
about).


	<h> The ideal layout </h>
	

There are five basic kitchen layouts which successfully accommodate the
work triangle: choose the one that is most appropriate to your room shape.
U-shaped. Kitchen units and appliances are arranged around three walls.
L-shaped. Units and appliances are arranged along two adjacent walls.
Island. Units and appliances are arranged around three walls with a 
free-standing unit in the centre of the room.
Galley. Units and appliances are arranged on opposite walls of the room.
Linear. Units and appliances are arranged along one wall.
  You may be lucky enough to have a room that is ideally suited to one of
these layouts but for most of us the perfect kitchen is a compromise between
theory and reality.


	<h> Storage sense </h>
	

The golden rule with storage is, wherever possible, to store things close
to where they will be used: pots and pans near the stove, knives and chopping
boards near the preparation area and so on.
  Look for ways to make frequently needed items as accessible as possible.
What were once features of only the most expensive kitchens can now be
purchased separately and installed in less pricey units. Deep drawers are
more practical for storing pots and pans than deep cupboards. An apppliance
cupboard, with power points, saves you lugging out the food processor, toaster
or whatever and keeps worktops free of clutter.
  Take a look at specialist storage shops and the kitchen sections of
department stores for space saving (amd space making accessories). Here,
10 inexpensive and easy ways to improve your kitchen instantly.
‚2 Keep wooden spoons handy in a tall pottery or stoneware jar next to the
stove.
‚2 If lack of space means you have to stack side plates on dinner plates
with saucers balanced on top, invest in a tiered wire plate rack: it will
save breakages and your temper.
‚2 Keep paper napkins under control with a perspex napkin holder. It stops
them from getting crumpled between meals and, for outdoor eating, saves
them from blowing away.
‚2 Kitchen knives stay sharper longer if they're stored in a wooden block
or on a magnetic wall rack.
‚2 Don't hide pretty special-occasion plates at the back of a cupboard -
hang them on the wall. They'll look good and you'll have extra storage space
free.
‚2 When the walls are full, look to the ceiling. Hanging storage works well
for pots, pans and utensils.
‚2 Hanging baskets are great for fruit, vegetables and eggs.
‚2 Increase your work space with a wooden board cut to fit over the sink;
or install a pull-out worktop.
‚2 Throw some extra light on your work tops without rewiring: clip-on spotlights
can be fastened to overhead cupboards.
‚2 Carousel units - the semi-circular baskets that swing out - make the darkest
corner cupboard easily accessible.
                                    


	<h>10 TOOLS EVERY HOUSE SHOULD HAVE </h>
	

A well-stocked workshop takes years to acquire but, to begin with, a few
tools will see you through. The secret: buy the best you can afford.

Even the most modest home requires occasional repairs, adjustments and
installations. Here are 10 tools we consider to be essential.
Hammer. A 560g curved claw hammer will adequately drive and pull most nails
used around the house. Those with steel or fibreglass shanks are strong,
and heads won't loosen. A rubber handle provides a nonslip, cushioned grip.
Screwdrivers. Buy four, two with flat blades and two Philips type - one
large and one small for each type. Select large, comfortable handles for
better turning power. The better-quality variety have good steel tips that
retain their shape, won't chip, bend, or become rounded with repeated use.
Tape measure. For easy measuring find a spring-retractable, 12mm wide tape,
at least 3.5m long with clearly readable numerals, and locking feature.
Adjustable wrench. A 20cm or 25cm crescent type is adequate for most household
tasks. Best brands are thinner for easier use in hard-to-reach spots, minimum
play of movable parts.
Pliers. A pair of 15cm slip-joint pliers is fine for ordinary gripping,
twisting, and holding needs. For fixing jewellery or bending wire, the needle
nose type is indispensable. For gripping large objects, the channel-lock type
works best. Inspect pliers before buying to make sure the handles move freely
and jaws mate squarely and precisely as they close shut.
Utility knife. Useful for cutting tough materials, opening cartons, cutting
holes, trimming or shaving almost anything. Those with retractable blades
are safer - when carried or stored. Replacement blades ensure a sharp edge
for all occasions and are inexpensive.
Drill. Hand drills are adequate and easy to use for the small holes needed
for curtain tracks, picture hanging, threading speaker wires, etc. For heavy
duty, do-it-yourself jobs requiring many holes, an electric drill is a
worthwhile investment. In either case, be sure you have a good quality 
drill-bit set. Better drills will stay sharp longer.
Saw. For cutting boards, shelves, or other materials, an 8-point (8 teeth
per 25mm) cross-cut saw with a 60cm blade is best.
Level. A 25cm or 30cm spirit level is adequate for levelling appliances
and setting hangers for pairs of small pictures. A 60cm or 75cm carpenter's
level is better for installing larger pictures and working with larger
projects.
Multi-purpose cutters will cope with wire, thin metal and tough plastic
as well as heavy cardboard.


</subsample>
