<subsample>
	<id> E02b </id>
	


	<source> Good Housekeeping 0 June 1986 </source>
	


	<h> CURTAIN CALLS </h>
	


	<h> Dress up your windows </h>
	

Well-dressed windows can make a room. Here's our guide to choosing tapes,
tracks and fabric to suit your budget and your style ...

Curtains can make or mar the finished effect of a room as well as serving
to give privacy, shut out light and darkness, keep in the heat and cut out
the draughts. Even if you make your own, curtains are not cheap; it makes
sense to do your homework before you part with your cash - and remember,
there's more to curtains than the fabric. The heading tapes and tracks are
just as important.


	<h> Heading for success </h>
	

How a curtain looks when you finally hang it depends on the heading tape
and the curtain track or pole you use. Certain fabrics are unsuitable for
use with certain heading tapes and heavy fabrics cannot be hung on thin,
lightweight tracks.
  Commercial curtain headings produce a variety of different effects and
the type of tape determines the amount of fabric required. When buying,
you may find a shop that has small sample curtains showing the finished
effect of the different headings; otherwise ask the assistant to pull up
a section of tape to give you an idea of how the curtain will hang.
  Plain fabrics look good with almost any heading tape but with patterned
fabric you need to think about how the pleating will affect the design -
it could spoil it or produce a different effect from the fabric on the flat.
The most popular heading tapes are as follows:
Standard gathered tape creates a frill at the top of the curtain. It's not
particularly decorative and is best hidden behind some kind of pelmet or
valance. It works best with lightweight fabrics and short curtains. Allow
one-and-a-half times the width of the curtain track if using curtain fabric;
twice the width for nets and sheers.
Pencil pleat tape gives a neat, tailored finish to curtains. Pencil pleats
take up a lot of room on the curtain track when pulled back; if you want
to ensure that plenty of light gets into the room, either use tie-backs
or extend the track beyond each side of the window. You need twice the width
of track for curtain fabric, three times for nets and sheers.
Pinch pleat or triple pleat tape is used extensively by professional curtain
makers and, happily, is also recommended for novices. You need twice the
width of the track for curtain fabric, two-and-a-half to three times for
the nets and sheers.


	<h> Hints on Headings </h>
	

‚2 Always tack and don't rely on pins. Heading tape moves out of position
easily.
_ Sew all seams in the same direction.
‚2 Buy a little more tape than you calculate you need so you can have pleats
exactly where you want them.
‚2 Don't cut off the cords when you've pulled up the tape. Store them on
a cleat or cord tidy so you can let out the fabric for cleaning or washing.
‚2 To ensure the excess cord doesn't show, pull up the tape from a point
20cm to 30cm in from the outside edge of the curtain.
‚2 Secure the base of pinch or triple pleats with a small hand stitch.
‚2 Use four hooks to each 30cm of curtain for good support.
‚2 If bulky headings bounce forward when the curtain is pulled back, fitting
a cording set will help.
‚2 Give sheer fabric a little body along the length of the heading by using
iron-on Vilene or other non-woven fabric.


	<h> On the right tracks </h>
	

You can hang your curtains from all manner of poles, rods and tracks made
from diverse materials and in a variety of designs. Have a good look at
what's around and check that the track you fancy is, in fact, suitable
for the fabric you've chosen, and designed to take its heading.
  Unusual windows may have special requirements: bays and bows look best
with a single track bent round; corner windows need curtains which draw
back to the outer edges; and windows with sloping tops require a cording
system to draw the curtains back to the longer side.
  In general, you get what you pay for with curtain tracks. The more expensive
ones are stronger, better made, more attractive and have gliders which run
more smoothly. However, you should suit track to fabric; you don't need
a Rolls-Royce rod to support your short filmy lightweight bathroom curtains.
  With large windows it is a good idea to check the manufacturer's
specification when you buy to ensure that the width and type of track you
choose can support the weight of your curtains (weigh them in a bin liner
on your bathroom scales).


</subsample>
