Our first (and last!) renovation. By J.C.Hamilton  

Renovation always costs three times more than you think, takes three times
longer than ever you have planned and is never finished.
  Who then would renovate a 100-year-old weatherboard house that hadn't
seen a paint brush for decades and was sitting far too close to terra firma
on rotten foundations?
  The answer is that there is always one fool willing to try, in this case,
dear reader, your honorable writer.
  The task: fix the house on the old Brooklands property near Port Arthur,
in southern Tasmania.
  To be frank, first impressions were not encouraging. There was no water
supply, save for a couple of shonky water tanks so a pump into the nearby
creek was a first priority.
  As with most renovating efforts the coffers were not bottomless so the
art of compromise was much practised.
  A pressure hot water cylinder was rejected on this basis- the old model
was connected to a rather inexpensive header tank on the roof.
  Stage two was a reassessment of the state of the bathroom, having decided
that a simple drainpipe poking through the wall to a rusted tin bath receptacle
outside, was too primitive.
  Besides, the holes in the floor would give access not only to the odd
Rattus rattus but also small elephants.
  For this job the services of one P. Rigozzi were engaged, he being not
only an artisan of the first order but also a man of considerable
practicability. Frankly, he needed to be.
  The floor was patched with one quarter inch hardboard overlay in preparation
for a vinyl tile job, the walls were expertly lined with radiata V-joint,
a combination fibreglass shower and bath was installed, and a washbasin
complete with Laminex bench, fitted.
  It took three times as long and cost nearly three times as much as this
naive renovator expected. Still, it worked, and a stream of visitors were
proudly shown the "beginning".
  Outside the plumbing work was considerable, the effluent system being
joined with the drainpipe from the kitchen sink that went nowhere except
somewhere under the dwelling. A decent french drain was a must.
  In all, time has revealed only two mistakes for this first attempt at
fixing a place up.
 The french drain out in the paddock for the kitchen and bathroom waste
should have been twice as big, especially as it was in a slight depression
that also attracts storm water. Also the floor fixing should never have
been done simply with overlay.
  The green and white tiles which matched well with the taps and towel rails
started to break up as the moisture crept through the hardboard. In short
the patch-up has proved to be a false economy with the short term prospect,
now, of having to rip it all up and put down a new floor.
  What we should have done is what the next fix-it expert, with the unusual
name of Ready-To-Go-Jones, advised for the laundry and back porch - put
down a concrete slab.
  The result is likely to outlast the rest of the abode by many a summer. It was simple and reasonably inexpensive, especially as we finished it ourselves to a 98% standard which was eminently suitable for the heavy duty vinyl floor covering.

