Providing the correct environment in which to learn art By Anthony Lambert Teaching art to 900 students sounds a daunting prospect. Australian Artist
talks to the principal of the City Art Institute in Sydney to see how he
manages  

  Many people want to become artists: high school students, housewives,
grandmothers, accountants and even doctors in mid-career crisis. Ken Rinehart
has seen them all. As head of Sydney's Art Institute it is his job to see
that all those who come to the school are given the best environment in
which to study the skills they need to practise art.
  About 900 students attend the City Art Institute which makes it the largest
single tertiary art institution in Sydney. However, unlike the Sydney College
of the Arts it is not an independent establishment but part of the Sydney
College of Advanced Education, an odd conglomeration of six Sydney institutes,
formed in 1982, teaching everything from nursing to early childhood education.
Prior to 1982 the City Art Institute was better known as the art school
in the Alexander Mackie CAE, a school which Rinehart helped establish.
  `I was head teacher in the fine art division of the National Art School,
(East Sydney Tech,) at the time,' Rinehart recalls. `The Gleeson Committee
Report had recommended the establishment of two art schools in Sydney,
one of which would become part of the existing CAE. On the 23rd of October,
1974, I was appointed dean of the school of art that was to be formed in
what was then Alexander Mackie CAE and was promptly told that on March 1
the following year I would have 600 students to teach. About 90 of them
would be first year students and the remainder ongoing students from the
fine arts diploma course at the National Art School. We managed to find
the staff, buildings and equipment to cope with those students and the
art school eventually grew to comprise about 800 of the College's total
student population of 1400. A year and a half before the 1982 amalgamation
which made us part of Sydney CAE I was appointed acting principal of the
entire College, a post left vacant by the appointment of the then principal
to chairman of the Education Commission'.
  The reorganisation which took place in 1982 that changed the Mackie art
school into the City Art Institute is a bureaucratic feat that is best
explained by Rinehart: `The Sydney Teachers College, Sydney Kindergarten
Teachers College, Sydney Nursery Teachers College, Guild Teachers College
and Alexander Mackie were amalgamated to form the Sydney CAE. But the
five colleges that became one were then divided up into six institutes
of a different composition to the original five colleges. Mackie became
two institutes - the art part forming the City Art Institute and the education
part becoming the St George Institute of Education. The Sydney Teachers
College also became two institutes - The Sydney Institute of Education and
the Institute of Technical and Adult Teacher Education. The two early childhood
education colleges merged to form one institute while the Guild College
largely disappeared as a major component, becoming simply the Guild Centre.
More recently an Institute of Nursing Studies has been established'.
  Last year the City Art Institute was again the focus of bureacratic
attention with a strong proposal from the NSW Higher Education Board that
City and the Sydney College of the Arts be amalgamated. That proposal
was eventually squashed by the Minister for Education (see last month's
Australian Artist) but the problems that initiated the proposal persist.
Both institutions have an accommodation problem (the Sydney College of
the Arts more so), their campuses scattered through a number of buildings
in several inner-city suburbs. And both need better funding. As a means
of solving those problems Rinehart came out in favour of the proposal at
the time and he still rejects the argument that an amalgamation would have
muddied the different approaches of the two schools.
  `That the two of us have different philosophical approaches is a load
of rubbish,' he argues. `Different philosophies apply more to individual
members of staff than to the schools. You will find far greater differences
in the philosophies of two people teaching painting in adjoining studios
than you would in any identifiable philosophies in the City Art Institute
and the Sydney College of the Arts. The two schools are very different
in composition - the Sydney College of the Arts has about 400 design students
doing very vocationally oriented courses and I think you would find greater
philosophical differences between their design and art departments than
you would between our art department and their art department. They have
300 people doing art and we have 900 people doing art: We would argue that
we have as many philosophies as we do lecturers and because of our greater
size we offer our students a greater choice.
  `I think larger art schools do in reality offer a greater choice than
smaller art schools. It is far easier for a student to come to an art school
of a reasonable size, take a particular option, realise it is the wrong one
and then change it, rather than go to a smaller art school, realise it is
the wrong one, and then change to another school. You only have to look
at Melbourne to see the problems with the numerous small art schools there'.

