<subsample>
	<id> E17a </id>
	


	<source> National Dog - November 1986 </source>
	


	<h> A book that dispels the myths and folklore </h>
	

CURTIS BROWN'S pungent writings on canine locomotion and structure are
well-known to readers of National Dog. His sharp dry wit enlivens a subject
that is complex, controversial and often hard for the average dog person
to follow. His enthusiasm for his subject is inexhaustible.
  So a major book by Curtis Brown on Canine Locomotion and Gait Analysis is
an event. It is the best book on dog gait that I have ever read.
  When I first met Curtis Brown in 1981 I was already familiar with his
writings. It was at the World Conference of Kennel Clubs held in Edinburgh,
Scotland. He was to deliver a paper alongside Mrs Rachel Page-Elliott on
the structure and movement of dogs. I was enthralled, and then he had
finished, I felt that a wider vision had come into my understanding of
dogs. Here was someone who could answer the question &quot;why?&quot; that arose so
often in my experience with dogs as a breeder and judge.  Why did some dogs
move differently from others? Why did a certain construction make a
good-looking dog do something he shouldn't when he gaited? What was the
reason some breeds had different construction than others?  Why should function
demand that certain limbs and muscles be designed in a certain way? Why
have some breeds in the show ring changed so radically?   
  It is stimulating to find someone who puts a trained eye and mind to the
aspect of the dog which in the showring is of such importance - and argument.
His conclusions will shock and surprise many, and certainly turn upside
down many widely held views on the subject. What you assumed was right is
probably quite incorrect, and scientifically*scentifically impossible!
The myths and folklore exposed!                          
                                                        

	<h> No assumptions  </h>
	

  The author's analytical mind, trained as a teacher and as an engineer,
prods and probes seeking answers, not by making assumptions but by researching,
analysing and checking. He seeks confirmation by scientifically*scentifically
proven data, documented research, his own observation of not only show dogs,
but working dogs, wild dogs and other wild animals where comparison is valid.
All this is backed up by the analysis of thousands of feet of slow motion
film and video, the use of cineradiography, data processing and other high
technology methods.                                      
  The dog world is mainly a world of amateurs. No formal training is required
to participate. Successful performance in the test area - the showring -
is based on the abstract values of personal visual appeal and a personal
interpretation of an intangible set of guide lines, the Breed Standards.
Breeding dogs for exhibition is a complex business, and we need all the
help we can get. In some way it is easier to breed dogs for performance
and function; the judgement is simpler - the dog either functions or it
doesn't!                                                
                                                        

	<h> New evidence </h>
	

  The thinking that has gone into analysis of the structure and movement
of the dog in the past has been based very heavily on the horse. Many of
the breed standards were written in the first place by horsemen. There are
plenty of books on dog canine movement, but they contain many conclusions
based on the wrong premise. It is here that such people as Curtis Brown,
and Rachel Page-Elliott, have explored deeper, rejected the false
assumptions, and presented totally new evidence.        
  Additionally, the whole direction of exhibiting dogs has changed and in
some cases the function, the purpose, that made a breed the way it was,
has become swamped by the aesthetic appeal. But if the variables of breeds
are to be maintained, then some thought must again be given to function.
  What Curtis Brown has tried to do is explain the physical traits of each
breed to indicate its efficiency for its function, and then to discuss how
best to evaluate in the show ring environment the functional efficiency,
together with the aesthetic appeal. Each breed should trot in a style which
indicates its purpose. He demonstrates what the differences in gait from
breed to breed are; there being as infinite a variety of gaits as there
are breeds. Then step by step he explains the basics of locomotion and its
dynamics.                                                
  Here then is a book which will fill the need that exists and add to our
understanding of what makes Fido move.                   
 To quote from the author's preface to the book: &quot;Dog shows are `shows'
in that the magnificent, the unusual, the bizarre and the performers are
all displayed in their sculptured finery. Selection of the best is usually
based upon either of these two kinds of observations (1) aesthetic appeal,
or (2) functional fitness as determined from visual examination. Either
or both may be the dominant consideration for a breed, and both have a
prominent place in judging the quality of an exhibit.   
  &quot;While the emphasis...(is) primarily to clues indicating a dog's fitness
for a function, aesthetic desirability will be included...&quot;.
  &quot;In the dog fraternity... is a need to differentiate between what is
efficient travel and what is to please the fancy.... before aesthetically
pleasing gaits can be considered, those that are functionally correct
must be delved into....it is no sin to require a dog to trot in a delightful
eye-appealing manner at a dog show; most of us enjoy it and approve....
However, if a person thinks such artificial style of travelling is functionally
efficient, his superficial knowledge of locomotion is exposed. Let us
recognise each style for what it is....&quot;                 
                                                       

	<h> Enlisted talents </h>
	

  For Dog Locomotion and Gait Analysis, the author has enlisted the talents
of Bonnie Dalzell, MA (who took her doctorate in movement and the anatomy
of dogs), who is an expert in the field of lure coursing, and Robert W.
Cole, who did the descriptive accurate drawings that are such an important
part of the book.                                        
  Don't try to read this book straight through. Read it in sections, absorb
it, re-read it, discuss it. Curtis Brown sharpens one's eyes and you become
aware of things you never noticed before. The appetite is whetted to explore
further, to read and then make one's own observations. On each page you
will find some gem of information, something that sets you thinking and
looking.                                                 
  Thank you Curtis Brown, for a book that will add much to the understanding
of dogs, and dog shows.                                  

	<bl> Frances Sefton </bl>
	
Dog Locomotion and Gait Analysis by Curtis M. Brown. Published by Hoflin
Publishing Ltd, Colorado, USA. Price in Australia $35.00.
                                                        

</subsample>
