HIT THE SLOPES  

Fun in the snow is a winter treat that all the family will enjoy. Tim Powditch
tells where to go, what to take, and surprise, how cheap it can be.

  WHEN you and your family return from your first ski trip this winter you'll
say to yourselves - "why on earth haven't we done this before?"
  Why not? Probably because you thought skiing was an expensive pastime
for rich thrillseekers in glamorous, far-away places like Switzerland and
Austria.
  The fact is that skiing is an affordable, exciting holiday which can
be enjoyed by all members of the family, regardless of their age or their
physical prowess. What's more, Australia has some of the best ski fields
in the world.
  The major resorts are in NSW and Victoria. They are modern, continually
updated and well and truly on the beaten track. NSW has Perisher Valley,
Thredbo, Smiggin Holes, Guthega, Charlotte Pass and Mt Selwyn. Victoria has
Mt Hotham, Falls Creek, Mt Buller, Mt Buffalo and Mt Baw Baw.
  Smiggins, Guthega, Mt Selwyn, Mt Buffalo and Mt Baw Baw are ideal for
first time families. Smiggins is a learners' resort. All of its slopes
are rated "easiest" and skiers there have access to the extensive ski school
of its much larger affiliate, Perisher. Also available is the "Ski Kids
Program" and childminding service. Parents can learn how to ski in peace
while the children are being minded (two to four years old) or taught to
ski (five to 13 years) for up to seven hours a day.
  Beginner and family ski packages are a major attraction at Guthega where
30 per cent of the uncrowded slopes suit novices. A family of four can stay
in an off-snow motel for five days with all meals (except lunch), lift tickets,
lessons, ski hire, and bus travel to the snow for as little as $59 per person
per day.
  Mt Selwyn is almost exclusively for families and beginners. Instructors
are especially geared to cater for the learner and accommodation is below
the snow line.
  Mt Buffalo slopes are groomed for newer skiers and 45 per cent of them
are in the novice class. It also boasts the cheapest daily entry fee
- $3 - and lift tickets - around $12.60 adult, $6.40 child. 

