A running pilgrimage by Frank McCaffrey    

  In 1941 our editor-at-large was taken prisoner of war in the Battle of
Crete. He was held in POW camps in and around Berlin for 2 1/2 years; the
remainder of the war years he spent in other camps in Germany.
 In September 1986 Frank returned to Crete and the scene of his capture
by German parachutists. Later, after travelling to London and northern Europe,
he returned to West Berlin to visit old sites and run the Berlin Marathon
on September 28.

 After a long and tedious flight from Sydney to Athens in a lumbering,
overcrowded Olympic Airways jumbo, I transferred to an airbus that took
off like a rocket over the sparkling Aegean Sea. Forty minutes later we
touched down at Heraklion.
 Back in Crete after 45 years! I caught a rattling bus to the town centre
and checked in at the hotel. Heraklion is a crowded, chaotic, dusty town.
Most road vehicles looked like they'd just crossed a desert. Mopeds were
everywhere, weaving in and out of traffic and people. There are open air
markets, sidewalk cafes and bazaars in every noisy street. A lot of people
sit outside their homes. Nobody seems to be working, except the restaurant
people who try to get you to take a seat and check out the menu.
 Maybe I should give you a bit of background to my `pilgrimage'.
 In Janyary 1941 a Cretan division of the Greek army had been wiped out
in Greece by advancing German troops. A few months later the Germans had
penetrated as far as Crete and their parachutists were landing in the streets
of Maleme, where the NZ HQ Company of the 22nd battalion, a handful of
Aussies and British troops, and us the remnants of an RN air squadron had
been joined by Cretans, mothers and widows, fathers and children of the
dead.
 May 20 at Maleme was hell for us with the aerial bombing and strafing we
got. The whole earth seemed to shake; the air was full of dust and stank
of explosives. We couldn't believe the Germans were giving us so much
attention. We considered ourselves a completely inadequate force of
disorganised survivors from Greece. But the Germans thought differently.
 Next morning before dawn they were back again, giving us hell. No breakfast
for us this morning, just a dash for cover to bomb-craters and hastily dug
trenches.
 At 6.20 am one of our guys screamed out, `Holy Jesus, look at this!' and
pointed to the sea. The sky was black with troop-carriers, bombers and
fighters; the first airborne invasion of the war was on the way, and the
battle for the island of Crete was about to begin. Later that day I was
taken POW. A German corporal said to me, `For you the war is over, ja?'
 September 12, 1986, about 2 pm, McCaffrey stands on a hill overlooking
that same site (almost to the metre, believe me). Hundreds of German soldiers
had died on this spot, and their graves are only 200 metres from me.
 This time I am alone. I'm wearing running gear and carrying a camera. There
is a hot wind blowing up from the sea just 800 metres below. The sky is
blue, not a cloud in sight. There is absolute silence - except for the wind.
 `In this very spot,' I keep thinking, `it happened.' But I survived. Hundreds
didn't. I am here, back again, recalling the days of my youth and the world
engulfed in war. It's the kind of flashback one sees on the movies - but this
is for real.
 I started my jog down that hill away from the spot where I thought I was
going to die. It was from here that we POW's were marched some 20 miles
(32km) to a transit camp at Galatos. I ran some of the route with the hot
sun on my back thinking of our days of utter despair, defeat, the fear,
the pain, the hunger and the sheer exhaustion. Here I was running along
that very road again - 45 years on.

 After a quick trek via London and on through France, Belgium, Holland,
Denmark and Sweden, September 22 found me speeding towards Berlin, and
I was seeing East Germany firsthand. Most buildings seemed in a state of
disrepair, and it was quite a drab scene in spite of the activity. Dull
weather didn't improve the scenery either.
 On arrival in Berlin we were greeted by guards, inspectors with sniffer
dogs, and passport checks. It was such a depressing sight, especially in
peacetime.
 Half an hour later we rolled into West Berlin. It was like another world - 
city lights, crowds in the streets, McDonald's neon signs flashing. No checks,
just get off the train.
 I headed for my hotel and although tired, took off on a walk looking for
somewhere to have a snack.
 I know - or should I say knew - Berlin. I was last here in 1944 when it was
all but shattered by allied bombs and the Russians were advancing rapidly
from the east. I looked at the thousands of Berliners and overseas visitors
as they milled around, and wondered how many of them had known Berlin  before
its devastation in the later years of the war or how many of them had known war
at all.
 Running in Berlin before the marathon was a great way of seeing the sights.
The first day I took in the Brandenburg Gate and the wall (two miles of
it) and later Checkpoint Charlie. I didn't miss a thing, and talked with
people several times. Running on a little asphalt track close to the wall
I saw three places in the bitumen where hand grenades had exploded and
crosses had been erected where some poor soul had died in an escape attempt.
 Marathon day dawned a little foggy and cool. We assembled in front of the
Reichstag and were sent on our way right on 9 am with a hint of some sun.
My feet hurt from all the walking on tour and I thought, `I wonder how far
I'll get.'
 This was a spectacular run right from the start. It was very much like
New York at times, especially when we got into built-up areas except that
people yelled `Bravo! Wunderbar! Prima!' and `Come on!' The spectators were
wonderful. Feeding stations bobbed up regularly, offering water, and
electrolyte drink, bananas (already peeled and cut up) and sponges. Bands
played, and a lot of people blew horns and beat drums.
 The stretch from 24k to about 31k was one of the most beautiful sections I've
seen on a marathon course. Golden and red autumn leaves, swept from the
trees by the slight wind, caressed us like confetti and even at this late
stage, when one is starting to have a bad time, one just couldn't ignore
the beauty of the scene and the smiling people encouraging us to keep going.
And we kept going, most of us.
 Finally Hohenvollerndam at 38k and the sight of the Kaiser Wilhelm church
in the distance, with the big sign `Ziel' (finish) not far off as we headed
down Kurfurstendam. Huge crowds clapped and yelled as one tottered thankfully
over the line to have a medal placed around one's neck and a kiss from one
of a group of German girls (I didn't envy them their job all those sweaty
runners!). Refreshments everywhere, those bananas again and also oranges,
malt beer, vegetable soup, you name it.  

