Today's kitchen with Vo Bacon  

   More and more fruit and vegetable markets are having an exotic fruit
corner. But too often not enough information is given to some of the less
common fruits, such as the carambola (star fruit), breadfruit, pepino and
even the persimmon.
  Carombola is a waxy, yellow or yellow-brown fruit. It's shaped like a
five-pointed star, hence the name star fruit or five corners. Use as soon
as possible or store briefly in refrigerator, well wrapped. First, wash,
then slice crosswise or lengthwise and remove seeds. It can be poached,
or stewed alone or with other fruits. It can also be used fresh in fruit
salads, made into jams, jellies, chutney, or juiced and added to other fruit
drinks. Carambola is high in vitamin A, and has also some vitamin C,
phosphorus, calcium, iron and potassium.
  Breadfruit, a native of Asia, spreading from Sri Lanka to China, is a
large green, rough-skinned fruit, turning a slight yellow when ripe. The
flesh when fully ripe is yellow and sweet, and tastes like fresh bread,
which probably explains its name. Cook and use the same way as potatoes,
or use for desserts. Cook then mash, or cook with milk or cream and sugar,
or serve with custard or sweet sauce. Seeds can also be cooked and eaten
like chestnuts.
  Pepino, originally from Peru, is also called tree melon or mellowfruit.
Shaped like a small melon, it has a satin-like green skin with vivid purple
stripes that change from green to yellow when ripe. The flavour is very
delicate, a mixture of melon, pineapple and lemon. You can use as any of
the melons, and the seed section is sweet and edible.
  Persimmon has a rich, delicious flavour, and must be eaten ripe. It's
delicious for breakfast, just cut in half and spoon out the flesh. Or use
in fruit salads, or pureed over ice-cream or sorbet, pie or steamed pudding.

  Have you stopped to consider what essentials are needed to start cooking?
The list can be endless. There are four main functions carried out in every
kitchen: preparation; mixing; cooking and serving; and cleaning up. So
here are the absolute essentials when first setting up a kitchen, to be
acquired as necessary or as culinary skills become greater.
  Preparation: Vegetable brush, paring knife, utility knife, wooden board, potato
peeler, strainer or colander, can opener, bottle opener, kitchen shears. Add when
possible: Chef's knife, parer/corer, other size strainers, boning knife, garlic
press, nutmeg grater, butter curler. 
  Mixing: Set of measuring spoons (4), set of measuring cups (4) for dry measures,
glass measuring cups (1 and 2-cup sizes), rubber scrapers or spatula, rolling pin,
grater (4 sided), funnel and pastry brush, set of mixing bowls, egg beater or whisk.
Add later: Electric beaters, blender, food processor. 
  Cooking and serving: Pot holders, frypan, 2 saucepans (1 small, 1 medium), potato
masher, long-handled fork, ladle, slotted spoon, pancake turner, wire rack, baking
sheet, baking pan, pie and cake pan, set of tongs, wooden spoon. Add later: Tea
kettle, more saucepans, crepe pan, cake pans, muffin pans, bread pans, steamer.
  Cleaning up: Detergent, pot scrubbers, wash cloths, rubber gloves, cleansers, dish
towels.
  And remember this list doesn't even start to include your convenient
electrical extras.

  Some secrets of chefs:
‚2 To cut a fresh cake easily: Dip a sharp knife in hot water.
‚2 To intensify the flavour of chocolate or sweet desserts: Always add a
pinch of salt.
‚2 For a beatiful even brown of sausages: Dip them in cream before frying.
‚2 Roast Beef redone: Spread with mustard, top with crumbs and dot with butter.
Grill until hot.

  Anyone who spends a great deal of time out-of-doors, whether walking,
running,hiking, climbing, biking or swimming, needs nourishing nibbles. Here
are a few suggestions:
‚2 Shelled sunflower seeds and currants or sultanas
‚2 Soy nuts and raisins
‚2 Dried apricots, almonds and pecans
‚2 Raisins and walnuts
‚2 Dates, chopped dried peaches or pears and nuts
‚2 Dried apples, apricots and pecans
‚2 Peanuts, dates, pumpkin seeds and cashews
  Add fresh or dried coconut to any of the above combinations.

 Dried Fruit Bar In a bowl mix together Stir in In a medium bowl beat together  
  
Add to dry ingredients and stir just until blended.
Spread in a greased 20cm square pan. Bake at 160°C (325°F) for 35 to 
45 minutes or until toothpick inserted in centre comes out clean. Cool on wire
rack. Cut into squares.
 Makes 16 x 5cm squares  


  All measurements in our recipes are standard metric cups and spoons approved
by the Standards Association of Australia. These are available at leading
department and hardware stores. All measurements are level.
  For easy reference, 1 cup is 250ml, 1 tablespoon is 20ml and 1 teaspoon
is 5ml. For recipes with eggs, use the 55 g size unless otherwise stated.

