Today's kitchen with Vo Bacon  

  Have you noticed in the markets a new vegetable called Spaghetti Squash
or Spaghetti Vegetable? If not, look for a slightly tough-skinned,
yellow-looking marrow in shape, a member of the squash family. When boiled or
baked, its flesh can be forked out like strands of spaghetti. It can be
used instead of pasta with traditional sauces or fresh herb sauces such
as pesto. Easy to cook - bake, boil or microcook - either whole, or cut
in half with seeds and fibre removed. Delicious tossed with butter, or
butter and brown sugar and cinnamon.

  News flash! Look for a leaflet in supermarkets and grocery stores, "Frozen
Foods ... from store to table", explaining how to buy, store, use and care
for your frozen foods. It gives precise and important information to the
consumer, and is prepared by the Australian Frozen Food Council.

  Many varieties of sweet potatoes can be found in the markets, from whitish
tan to brownish red, dry or soft-fleshed. They are an excellent source of
vitamin A and potassium, and a good source of calcium, phosphorus, thiamin
and vitamin C. Here is an unusual recipe to go with veal, chicken or ham:

 Orchard Sweet Potato Bake  

  The red-skinned with deep orange flesh are the best to use when available.
In a saucepan of boiling water place 
  3-4 small to medium sweet
    potatoes, well-scrubbed
and cook, covered, until just fork tender. Drain, and let cool until able to handle.
Peel and slice into circles or cut lengthwise, and place in a shallow baking
dish.
 Spoon over  
  
In a small bowl combine 
  
and spread over sweet potatoes-apricot mixture.
 Sprinkle with  
  
Bake at 180°C (350deg;F) for 15 to 25 minutes, or until top is lightly 
browned and hot.
 Makes 4-6 serves  

  Fun with Pancakes: Make your favourite recipe or use a pancake mix. Just
before serving sprinkle with crushed mixed cereal of your choice; chopped
nuts or raisins; wheatgerm; dried fruits, finely chopped; crumbled crisply
cooked bacon; grated apple; chopped fresh fruit; or make pancakes the size
of 50-cent pieces to entice the young.

  A haggis made easy for haggis lovers. Prepare one package of onion soup
mix with 3 cups water, following directions. Add 2 cups quick cooking oats
and 1/2 teaspoon black pepper. Cook until thickened, then add 500 g sausages,
crumbled. Cook 3 to 5 minutes longer. Shape into a buttered bowl and turn
out on to a platter. Warm 1/2 cup Scotch whisky, ignite and circle the haggis
with flames. Serve.

  Tuna a la Grande: Chill tuna in the can. Turn out and encircle with sour
cream, hard-cooked egg yolks and whites, sweet white or red onion, all finely
chopped, and garnish with chopped dill or parsley. Serve with fingers of
dark bread or toast as an appetiser, salad or entree.

  With beer only? Not necessarily, but great with beer comes this sandwich
from Switzerland. Spread two slices of dark rye or pumpernickel with butter.
Cover one side with slices of sweet red or white onion and the other with
crumbled blue cheese. Slap together and enjoy.

  A great dessert from Lebanon. In one cup of boiling water soak 1 cup sultanas
for about 5 minutes. Drain and mix with 1/4 cup orange juice, 2 tablespoons
honey, grated lemon rind and dash of cinnamon. Spoon over 6 bowls of plain
or chilled vanilla yogurt.

  I once had this Basque Shepherds Stew at a Basque Ball. Very tasty! In
a pan heat 2 tablespoons butter and 2 tablespoons oil. Lightly brown 1 cup
long-grain rice, add 1 onion and 1 green pepper, sliced. Stir in 1 can consomme
(or beer stock). Cover and cook slowly for 18 to 20 minutes, or until liquid
is gone, rice tender. Stir occasionally and toss with 1/2 cup sliced stuffed
olives.
Makes 4 serves.

  One of my favourite salads is the Orange-Onion Salad. From Spain, where
you find the greatest olive groves, comes the Ensalada Valenciana. Combine
2 large sweet oranges, thinly sliced; an onion, thinly cut; 1/4 cup Spanish
olive oil; 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar; salt and pepper to taste. Marinate
15 to 20 minutes. Toss with salad greens and sliced black and pimiento-stuffed
olives.

  Speaking of olives, try this cold sauce poured over grilled fish or chicken.
In a blender or processor place 1 small onion, halved, a handful of parsley,
1 clove garlic and blend until fine. Add 1/4 cup olive oil, 1 teaspoon prepared
mustard, salt and pepper to taste. Blend well. Add 1/2 cup each sliced green
olives and tomato sauce. Stir to blend. Also makes a good barbecue sauce.

  Want an easy way to obtain onion juice? Cut off the end of an onion and
press on a glass lemon juicer, with a plastic bag over the onion. Presto,
onion juice.

