CAROL BATES How bread became her Staff of Life Her experiment with bread making led to an unexpected revolution  

  Ten years ago, a young housewife named Carol Bates pulled out a recipe
book and made a loaf of bread. She had no idea how this would change her
life.
  Carol had taken the first step on her path from housewife with "no training,
no qualifications, no nothing" to super-successful business woman.
  That first loaf of bread, Carol said, was "a great carry-on, all that
kneading," but her husband Ken said he would never eat bought bread again.
So Carol started experimenting.
  In a few short years and almost without realising it, she had revolutionised
breadmaking in Australia. Today, her Staff of Life breadmaking kits are
in thousands of Australian homes.
  With 60,000 recipe books, 6,000 students, one flour mill and countless
loaves behind her, Carol still lives in rural Red Hill, on Victoria's
Mornington Peninsula, with Ken and their two sons. She still bubbles with
enthusiasm when asked about her no-knead technique.
  "It's so easy, you don't have to think about it. It's like making a bed
... sometimes you forget you've done it."
  Carol smiles often and talks easily, moving her hands through the air
like a dance instructor. She describes her life as idyllic. But it was not
always so.
  It took a crippling back injury in 1979 to make Carol realise what she
wanted from life. For seven months, she couldn't walk. "Most of the time
I cried, because I was in such agony. But I thought `if I ever get out of
this, I'll do something with my life'."
  Lying in bed, she wrote her thoughts in a writing pad. "When you're a
housewife with children, you often think of what you'll do one day or when
the kids get older. You can think like this forever. When I was stuck in
bed and I believed I'd never get better, I thought of all the things I should
have done when I was fit and well. I decided that if I ever got better,
I'd get out and do things."
  Get better she did. And she got out and did things.
  Ken resigned from his bank job and together they found premises a few
streets from their Red Hill home.
  "These shops had been sitting there and no one could see the potential,"
said Carol. 

