Ngorongoro By John Laird  

The Ngorongoro Crater of East Africa is a national park and a spectacular
sanctuary for wild animals, including endangered species like the black
rhinoceros, that attracts camera-toting `hunters' from all over the world.
Twenty to thirty million years ago, the eastern third of Africa was shaken by
tremendous geological upheavals. The surface of the continent convulsed,
opening up deep faults and fissures that allowed molten rock to surge up from
within the earth's core. For millions of years volcanic activity continued,
creating whole mountain ranges and the majestic snow-capped peaks of Mt
Kilimanjaro and Mt Kenya. The Great Rift Valley was formed. Stretching from
southern Mozambique, this 3200-kilometre-long wonder now cuts its way through
Malawi, Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and Ethiopia, after which it becomes the Red
Sea. Among the rifts lie the great lakes of East Africa and between the rifts
and the mountains lies the Serengeti Plain, home to huge migratory herds of
wildebeest, zebras and gazelles.

  The massive scale of these natural phenomena cannot help but inspire awe.
But the force and violence that helped to shape them also gave birth to
another jewel to delight the traveller - nothing is quite so moving as a first
experience of Ngorongoro.
  A great volcanic explosion, perhaps audible across the width of Africa;
millions of tonnes of rock and molten lava flying into the sky - that was the
likely, fiery birth of this huge caldera depicted by geologists as occurring
1.75 million years ago.
  Now, all these years later, Ngorongoro Crater is a national park and a
spectacular sanctuary for some 27,000 wild animals, including rare species
like the endangered black rhino, and, of course, that popular King of Beasts.
Camera-toting big game `hunters' and conservationists alike agree that there
is no other reserve or game park in the region - and there are some 50 in East
Africa - where wildlife can be found so naturally ` at home' and instantly
accessible to visitors.
  Mists swirling around the 55-kilometre circumference of the crater heighten
the anticipation of a first approach. Spear-toting Masai herdsmen and their
cattle can be seen along the roadside, against a backdrop of emerald green
hills. Then, a sharp branching to the right off the main road to Serengeti ...
over a small hill ... suddenly, there it is, laid out in full view. The first
glimpse is more than a spectacle. It is an emotional experience.
  Ngorongoro Crater covers an area of 260 square kilometres. Its diameter
varies between 16 and 19 kilometres and its steep walls rise some 650 metres
from the crater floor. It contains not only a self-sustaining ecosystem, with
a lake fed by natural springs, a small forest and rangelands, but it also has
something of a unique climate. While mists often shroud land above the crater,
spilling like ether over the crater rim, the sun shines through into the
crater's centre creating a giant doughnut effect.
  Ngorongoro is the world's largest intact and unflooded caldera (not actually
a crater, in strict geological terms) and it is a paradise for plains animals,
with more than two-thirds of its floor containing short grass. It is a delight
to the visitor, with its unobstructed view and network of dirt roads. Park
officials insist that trips into the crater be made by four-wheel-drive
vehicles only - a necessity that becomes obvious when you encounter the very
steep and rocky road which descends into it.
  There is perhaps no other place on earth where so many species of animals
exist side by side in such a small-scale natural habitat. You might spot a
group of wildebeest, zebras or gazelles and only a hundred metres further on a
pride of lions lolling in the sun. But contrary to what you might expect,
lions do not account for the most kills in the crater. It is the hyena that
plays the chief role of predator: the short grass and open nature of the
crater floor do not lend themselves to the lion's hunting technique of
stealth. But the lions thrive by helping themselves to the greater share of
the spoils.
  Chief conservation warden Joseph ole Kuwei said there were 120 lions in the
crater last year - they are on the increase. Six cheetahs had taken up
residence at last count. The endangered black rhino is down from 100 in the
mid-1970s to less than 10 at present, he added. Poaching of rhinos for their
horns was a big problem from 1979-82, and other problems continue. One rhino
was speared by a Masai herdsman defending his grazing cattle in 1982; one died
in a rhino fight and another died giving birth in 1984.
  Also to be found in the crater are elephants, hippos, buffaloes, impalas,
elands, reedbucks, Grant's gazelles, Thomson's gazelles, hartebeest and a
variety of bird life including flamingoes, crested cranes and ostriches. Many
animals come and go from the crater - with the exception of giraffes - but
there is always a large animal population present.
  A circuit around the crater can occupy a whole day, and the visitor is
`guaranteed' to encounter lions, rhinos and a number of other animals. Most
animals seem to stick to one preferred location for long periods, and rhinos
can always be seen between the lake and the woods. But animals' differing
temperaments dictate how close you can get. There is no problem driving right
up beside the nonchalent lions and cheetahs (never get out of your vehicle!)
but the rhinos get quite nervous and may even make motions to charge
intruders. Temperamental buffaloes, similarly, are quite capable of
over-turning a Landrover. Shy elands keep a distance of a couple of hundred
metres, but silver jackals may peer at you from close up before trotting away.
Nature seems to have reached a perfect balance in the crater; all species seem
to be on the increase.
  The Ngorongoro Crater is part of a large reserve known as the Ngorongoro
Conservation Area, which also includes a stretch of the Serengeti Plain and
the Olduvai Gorge, home of early man, Zinjanthropus, whose remains in the
area were discovered by Dr Mary Leakey in 1959 and have been dated between
one-half to one million years old. There are also some smaller craters and
some volcanic peaks in the conservation area: Loolmalasion (3649 m), Oldeani
(3189 m) and Lemagurut (3133 m). The rim of Ngorongoro is about 2440 m above
sea level, but in its original shape may have reached an elevation of 4600 m.
  Nowadays, some 18,000 Masai - formerly East Africa's most feared warrior
tribe - inhabit the reserve. They are allowed to take their herds into the
crater but not to live there. The Masai are a proud race, tall, slim and with
strikingly handsome features, and are common to both Tanzania and Kenya. The
men dress in an orange-red dyed cloth, with their hair traditionally pulled
into a long sheath that hangs down the back of the neck. The women wear bright
coloured beads strung on brass wire. Their distinctive appearance makes fine
tourist snapshots, but invariably a fee is demanded. One traveller in
southern Kenya who tried to forgo the fee and snapped away regardless,
suddenly, to his shock, found a Masai spear embedded in the side of his car.
  More than most other tribes in East Africa, the Masai have retained their
traditional ways and generally shunned modern and commercial practices.
However, they have developed a monetary need which they never had before,
according to ole Kuwai, to buy rice, maize flour and clothes. Masai numbers
are growing and their herds are increasing, and thus the potential for
conflict with wildlife in the conservation area.
  What to do about the Masai was a big problem in instituting conservation of
the Serengeti and Ngorongoro ecosystems. The tribe formerly inhabited the
whole of the Serengeti. But in 1959 a committee of inquiry was invited from
Britain to settle the conflict between conservation and Masai grazing: the
Ngorongoro Conservation Area was set up where the Masai would have residential
and grazing rights, but they would vacate the major part of the Serengeti
itself, leaving it as a national park. But no permanent dwellings or any
cultivation are allowed in the conservation area.
  Conservation officials have also turned their attention to serious
environmental problems in surrounding areas, problems of deforestation and
soil erosion. They are trying to persuade Masai to relocate away from the
crater area, to switch to better breeds of cattle to help limit overgrazing of
land, and to adopt environment-enhancing practices, such as tree planting.
  Wildlife in Ngorongoro exists much the same way today as it must have done
for thousands of years. At least, we have a parallel account by the first
European explorer to visit and record his observations of the crater. He was Dr
Oscar Baumann of Germany who led an expedition to the rugged highlands in 1882.
On 18 March of that year, he wrote in his diary: `Starting at 9 a.m. we passed
through open grassland with marshy rills and with charming scattered groves.
At noon we suddenly found ourselves on the rim of a sheer cliff and looked down
into the oblong bowl of Ngorongoro, the remains of an old crater. Its bottom
was grassland, alive with a great number of game; the western part was occupied
by a small lake. We went down the steep slope and started to pitch our tents at
the foot of the precipice ... At nightfall several Masai warriors were seen
prowling around the camp, probably with the intention of stealing cattle. The
number of sentries was accordingly doubled and the rest of the night was
quiet.'
  Baumann was impressed with the abundance of game in the crater and recorded
how he shot one wildebeest and three rhinos. He left them for the Masai who
were living in the crater. Those Masai appeared to be fairly well fed on game,
but Baumann had recently encountered Masai in surrounding parts suffering from
terrible famine and disease. Rinderpest and smallpox were rampant at that time.
Accounts of other expeditions of that era attest to the wanton destruction of
wildlife that can only appal us today. Further to the east, Count Teleki's
expedition, travelling from Kilimanjaro to Lake Rudolph in 1886, disposed of
99 rhino, while a group of Indian Army officers and a Captain Willoughby,
hunting around the eastern slopes of Kilimanjaro, killed 66 rhino in four
months.
  Later, in the early 1900s, two German settlers set up a cattle ranch inside
Ngorongoro Crater, but were evicted when Germany lost its East African colony
to Britain at the end of World War I. However, the ruins of Adolph's farm, so
named for Adolph Seitendopf, still remain near the northeast wall of the
crater. There is evidence, too, of much earlier human habitation: pieces of
pottery from unknown former occupants have been found near the Seneto Springs
west of the lake.
  Today, the whole of Ngorongoro Conservation Area is carefully managed and is
a tourist attraction with two lodges right on the rim of the crater, a camping
ground and some smaller lodges further from the crater area. There is also a
conservation headquarters, a tourist office with transport for hire and a
small staff village. Following a period from 1977-84, when the border between
Tanzania and Kenya was closed over a tiff in the wake of the collapse of the
East African Community, access to Ngorongoro is now possible by a long day's
drive from Nairobi.

