Why pay more?  

Investigate some of the best international travel deals in this guide to
23 countries prepared by David McGonigal.

  In arranging an overseas trip, the one thing you never lack is brochures.
These range from elaborate publications produced by airlines or national
tourist organisations down to a flyer for Ol' Hank's Vintage Auto Barn in
Kansas City. Hidden in all this are some very fine deals for travellers
- often only available if purchased in Australia before you set out.
  Most countries offer discount rail passes - and in Europe there are several
rail passes which operate in most countries (such as Eurail) or in a group
of countries (the Scandrail pass for Scandinavia, for example). Another
saving offered to overseas visitors by many countries is to allow purchases
without the imposition of local Value Added Tax.
  Here's a guide to what is available. Unless otherwise indicated, prices
are in Australian dollars. However, as the Australian dollar's exchange
rate fluctuates and the situation in other countries may shift, it is
inevitable that prices and packages will change. Use this as a guide only
and follow it up with your own enquiries when planning your trip. This survey
should be read in conjunction with After the flight in Golden Wing January,
1986, which gave details of discounts offered by airlines for ground content,
stopovers and ongoing travel.
  The principal rail pass in Europe transcends any national borders so we'll
deal with it first. The Eurail pass is valid in all Western European countries
except Great Britain and Northern Ireland. It gives you unlimited first-class
travel on all trains but you have to pay a reservation fee and for sleeping
accommodation. The ticket must be purchased outside Europe: it costs $405
for 15 days, up to three months costs $1055. It is valid for some ferry
travel. The youth pass for those under 26 is for second-class travel and
is considerably cheaper. For people under 26 there are also the Interrail
and BIGE passes.
  Canada is considerably larger than Australia, so if you are planning on
visiting several destinations in Canada it's essential to shop around for
the best way to do this. Vancouver on the west coast is also host to Expo
86, which runs from May 2 to October 13 - it's to be the largest world
exposition ever held in North America.
  Both of the Canadian airlines - CP Air (which flies out of Australia)
and Air Canada - have discount fares available for visitors which are not
available for locals. CP Air's discounts were given in our earlier survey.
Air Canada has a North America Travel pass for four flights (C$520) up to
12 flights for C$774. You can also buy one-destination tickets for travel
in the US and Canada in Australia at rates 30% less than the economy fare
- the tickets have to be bought in Australia. So do add-on fares to reach
a North American destination after the trans-Pacific flight - these can
be 50%-70% off the price you'd pay in Canada.
  In Ontario, overseas visitors are entitled to have the State sales tax
refunded: 7% on "non-disposable" purchases and 5% for accommodation. If
you have the time, the cheapest way to see the country may be to use a
driveaway company. These organisations are listed under "Automobile, Truck
&Drive-Away, Transporting" in Canadian Yellow Pages - they take on the
job of getting someone to drive a car a long distance while the owners fly.
The "someone" can be you - you only have to pay for petrol. You are allowed
a set number of days to get the car there and have to lodge a deposit.
  VIA Rail is the combined Canadian passenger rail service. There are local
services as well as the Canadian which runs across the country. Canrail
passes are available either in Australia or Canada for unlimited rail travel
- either for one region of Canada or the whole country. Bus passes are also
available - the return fare from west coast to Montreal in the east is C$198.
Greyhound lines in Canada is represented in Australia by Greyhound Australia.
  Fiji has a discount scheme on Fiji Air. The airline, which links the numerous
islands, offers a Discover Fiji pass which is valid for 14 days and costs
F$199.
  France will refund VAT paid by Australians after they leave the country.
The amount due is paid into your Australian bank account. The total purchases
in each store must be at least 800 FF to qualify and there are some
restrictions on what goods are included in the scheme.
  The French National Railroad (SNCF) has a discount system for foreign
nationals. The France Vacances pass is available both here and in France
and gives you either nine days or 16 days travel within a one-month period
at either first or second class rates. In addition to unlimited rail travel,
the pass includes discounts on bus excursions, free travel on the Paris
bus and Metro network and admission to the Pompidou Museum. It also gives
discount on car hire with unlimited kilometres. You must be over 21 and
have a credit card and the first reservation must be made at least eight
days in advance.
  In Paris, you can buy a discount ticket for travel by Metro, bus or Regional
Rapid Transit (RER) for two, four or seven days.
  Germany offers its own discount DB Tourist Card rail pass for foreigners.
For second-class trains it costs $110 for four days, $172 for nine days
or $235 for 16 days; first class is $156 for four days, $235 (nine days)
and $320 (16 days). The pass also allows travel on some bus tours and public
transport within cities and discounts on river cruises and travel to West
Berlin.
  Other discount tickets, not restricted to visitors, are available in the
major cities and within regions.
  Greece has a rail discount scheme: the price per person varies according
to the number of people in a group. For a single person, the 1985 price
was Dr 3360 for 10 days and Dr 7440 for 30 days. The price is expected to
rise by 5% in 1986. Note, however, that the rail network in Greece is not
as well developed as in many other European countries. For most travellers,
a more useful discount is the Aegeanpass, a ferry pass offered only to
Australians by Aegean Tours (with a similar pass issued by Caras Tours in
Melbourne). The passes are valid for unlimited ferry travel for 15 days
or one month.
  Holders of Eurail passes pay only a small charge for deck travel by ferry
from Brindisi, Italy, to Patras, Greece. A seat or cabin is charged at
the full fare. A similar system applies from Piraeus (the port of Athens)
and Haifa, Israel.
  Holland's rail pass costs Dfl 78.50 for three days or Dfl 396.00 for a
month, second class. A Museum Card costs Dfl 20 for people over 25 and gives
free admission to 250 museums. Many restaurants exhibit the "tourist menu"
sign which provides a three-course meal for a standard price of Dfl 16.75
(1985 price) - the quality of food is variable, of course.
  Hong Kong as a free-enterprise, duty-free country can't offer much by way
of discounts or tax concessions to visitors. However, there is one privilege
available for overseas guests - admission to the members' stand at a Hong
Kong race meeting. Races are held at Happy Valley or Sha Tin tracks on
Wednesdays, Saturdays or Sundays from September till May. You need to bring
your overseas passport and make the booking in Hong Kong on 5-244191. The
cost is HK$200, which includes pick-up from one of several points, a Chinese
meal, a guide (the racing/betting system is somewhat different in Hong Kong)
and admission to the exclusive members' enclosure at the track. A race calendar
is available from the Hong Kong Tourist Association office at 255 George
St, Sydney.
  India's trains have great fascination for the rail buff. Every day, they
move more than 10 million people on carriages ranging from "colourful" second
class to the "Palace on Wheels" which was originally built for Maharajahs
in the desert State of Rajastan. Between October and March, the "Palace"
sets out from Delhi for an eight-night tour of Rajastan. Accommodation is
on the train - there is also a lounge, minibar and kitchenette with attendants
in each saloon. 1985 prices ranged from 1250 Rs to 2125 Rs.
  Indrail passes are also available for unlimited rail travel throughout
India. They are available in India for foreign nationals. The best class
costs from US$160 for seven days to US$600 for 90 days; second class from
US$35 for seven days to $130 for 90 days.
  Indian Airlines, the domestic carrier, has two discount schemes. The Discover
India fare is available in India to foreigners and costs US$375 for 21 days
with unlimited itinerary and stopovers. The India Wonderfares split the
country into four sections (not surprisingly, North, South, East and West)
and charge US$200 for unlimited travel for one week within one region. Again,
it can be bought in India.
  Although not strictly a discount, the chance to stay in a Maharajah's
palace which has been converted into a hotel - and pay less than you would
for a hotel in Australia - is good value. The Government of India Tourist
Bureau in Australia has details on a number of Palace Hotels - including
the famous Lake Palace Hotel at Udaipur. Prices for a room start from 50
Rs and go up to $100 a double for the Lake Palace Hotel.
  Indonesia provides a discount pass for air travel on the internal Garuda
network. The pass must be purchased in Australia and there are no refunds
after the commencement of travel. The route is fixed at the time of booking
but the dates of travel remain open. There are three passes: five cities
in 10 days for US$300, 10 cities in 20 days for US$400 or 33 cities in 60
nights for US$500. Depending on the route you select, the saving can be
up to 50% of the standard domestic airfare.
  Ireland has a "Springtime in Ireland" discount scheme operating throughout
the country until the end of May. The bulk of discounts are in the area
of accommodation but also include travel to and within Ireland, entertainment,
shopping and admission to tourist attractions. Discounts are up to 50%.
  Aer Lingus, the Irish airline, offers discounts throughout the year for
rental cars - the price varies by season. A small car for a week costs $183
in April-May, $203 May-June and September-March, and $252 July-September.
  Rail/bus passes are available for $107 for seven days or $154 for 15 days.
Rail-only passes cost $84 and $125 respectively. Eurail passes may be used
from France to Ireland.
  There is a discount meal scheme for tourists to Ireland, too. It offers
two standards of set price tourist meals - either IR£5 or IR£7.35
for three courses. Refunds of the VAT tax (from 8% to 35%) are available
for tourists - there may be a minimum of IR£50 per shop and you must
have the invoice stamped by customs as you leave the country.
  Italy has long had a petrol coupon system in which foreign travellers
could use tax-free coupons to purchase petrol throughout the country. However,
this has been suspended at least until the end of February.
  There are two Italian Rail passes. The first gives unlimited travel on all
trains in Italy - including express trains. First class costs from $148
for eight days to $258 for 30 days; second class costs from $94 for eight
days up to $162 for 30 days. The Kilometric ticket costs $181 first class
and $101 second class. For that you get 3000 kilometres of rail travel over
two months - up to five people can share the pass and can all travel together
on the one pass.
  Japan presents language problems for the overseas visitor. 

