"A speech pathology program for E.S.L. children in a kindergarten" "Programming for E.S.L." Carolyn Hastings, Speech Pathologist.  

I was pleased to read Christina Gallant's letter about children from bilingual
backgrounds presenting with language delay/disorder published in the Australian
Communication Quarterly Vol. 1 June 1985.

Having worked in Community Health (and more particularly in a community
with a high migrant population) for the past few years, I have encountered
numerous examples - sometimes a kindergarten full - of children with this
problem. Each time I have had a professional dilemma to contend with; one
which I have largely had to resolve myself owing to the lack of research
in this area and the lack of guidelines as to what role the speech pathologist
has in these cases.

On occasions, the referrals have been quite appropriate with the child
typically presenting with poor speech and language development in both
languages and a history of recurrent upper respiratory tract infections.
Audiological assessment indicates middle ear dysfunction which is presumed
to be the underlying cause of the delayed speech and language. Other children
have had a more diverse developmental delay requiring far more investigation
and intervention beyond speech therapy. However, at other times, some
kindergartens and primary schools have made or attempted to make bulk
referrals of children who for no obvious reason other than an English-deprived
environment, present with, not surprisingly, poor English skills. Sometimes
I have felt that these referrals have been made because the teacher genuinely
believes that such problems fall into the realm of speech therapy (and who's
to say they don't); at other times it has been a desperate plea for help
from a teacher who feels at a loss as to how to cope with these children
who are not achieving with the "normal child" kindergarten/school curriculum;
while another group seem keen to involve all the resources they can think
of; and a final group, unfortunately, can only fit into the mould of "pass
the buck". It is noteworthy that the referrals invariably come from the
child's teacher and are seldomly instigated by the parents although they 
generally readily agree to the referral expressing at least some concern
about the child's communication skills.

How should the speech pathologist respond?

The professional role I have evolved in such cases is one of
consultant/resource person to the kindergarten and primary school teachers.
My rationale for this approach has been: 1. since the child attends
kindergarten/school daily, the teacher has much greater access whereas,
at best, I could offer a weekly therapy session - the assumption being that
greater access means more opportunities to elicit target language behaviors
from the child. 2. it is important to maintain the continuity and integrity of the
child's kindergarten/classroom program rather than having the child withdrawn
for "special lessons" - the assumption being that with limited language
skills the child is likely to be more dependent on the experiential aspects
of kindergarten/classroom activities which would then lose their context
and meaning when the child was withdrawn. 3. it is important to maintain
the child's own unique identity within the group - an identity which has
developed from the child's own characteristics, not from the distinction
which may result if the child has "a special friend" who comes to visit,
or is frequently absent on "mysterious ventures". 4. supplying the teachers 
with structured language programs and resource material to expand  their 
skills in assisting the language development of these children reduces my
long-term workload and hence is a time and cost efficient exercise - the
assumption being that teachers will re-use or modify such material and continue
to develop their skills in working with these children without requiring
the constant support of a speech pathologist. 5. by incorporating a language
program into the regular kindergarten/classroom program, the child has
immediate opportunities to experiment, practise and modify newly acquired
language skills with his/her peers - the assumption being that the child
has some awareness of the target language behaviours and can positively
gain by conforming to the language skills of his/her peers. It is assumed
that the child can learn from the feedback he/she receives from his/her
peers.

Of course, these arguments may apply to any child presenting with special
needs, not only those children from non-English speaking backgrounds presenting
with language problems. However, it is the concept of maintaining "normalcy these children which is so important and which directs me to take this
approach.

The main criterion for success in using this approach is the co-operation
of the teachers involved. The teachers need to be prepared to accept guidelines
and suggestions from the speech pathologist; to make necessary modifications
to their kindergarten/classroom programs; to regularly devote some individual
time to the child, that is to make a deliberate commitment. My experience
has been that most teachers are keen to make this commitment, but there
are always a few who despite good intentions never quite "get around to
it".
 
In terms of the strategies used, I have found a structured language program
to be the most successful. The teachers appreciate the defined framework
of the program while the children make more rapid gains when the focus is
on specific target language behaviours. Generalization of the language
behaviours to other contexts is rarely a problem. It would seem that what
these children require is a structure in which to learn language; they have
already been exposed to the language enrichment/bombardment approach which
is used in the majority of kindergartens and prep. grades and have found
this to be confusing and overwhelming.

Below is a shortened form of one of the language programs I have developed
for use in a kindergarten with a high proportion of children from non-English
speaking backgrounds (including Greek, Arabic, Lebanese, Vietnamese, Chinese,
Polish). For this particular kindergarten the issue of which language to
work through (English vs. the child's home language) is impractical. With
such a mixture of language backgrounds, English as the children's second
language is the only common feature. For other cases this issue needs to
be considered.

There are many questions which remain unanswered, many issues which need
to be addressed and much research which needs to be done. Speech pathologists
need to be involved in this process, to make an active contribution in
establishing our role, if any, in this special area of child language, and
more generally in the field of English as a Second Language.

 PROGRAM FOR ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 
CHILDREN AT X KINDERGARTEN  

1. Hearing Assessment - all children require a hearing assessment. This
can be arranged at ..................... 

2. Vocabulary - It is probably best to work within a specific category
‚2 plan kinder activities around the category
‚2 work intensively for, say, one week per category
‚2 build-in a lot of revision to these activities.
‚2 keep activities simple so that the children can focus on the language
and not on the complexities of the activity itself.
‚2 remember that we, as adults, may become bored with an activity but young
children can often obtain pleasure, self-confidence and security through
constant repetition and a regular routine.
Suggested Categories: body parts, animals, food, actions, household utensils,
things which move, shops.

3. Language Comprehension - give "staged" instructions 
Start with 1 stage commands and work your way slowly up to 3 stage commands. 
Use this order of difficulty as a guide:
(1) single commands associated with own body e.g. "Show me your teeth".
(2) single commands to act e.g. "Sit down".
(3) single commands to identify environmental objects e.g. "Point to the
door".
(4) single commands associated with other's body e.g. "Touch Peter's hair".
(5) single commands to act upon environmental objects e.g. "Pick up the
train".
(6) multiple commands - 2-3 body parts e.g. "Touch your toes and cover your
eyes".
(7) multiple commands - 2-3 actions e.g. "Turn around and stamp your feet".
(8) multiple commands - 2-3 actions with environmental objects (i) related
events e.g. "Pick up the scissors and put them on the table".
(ii) unrelated events e.g. "Close the door and get a book".
Be careful of your non-verbal cues when giving commands i.e. make sure that
your gestures, eye-pointing etc. do not give the child clues as to what
you are expecting him/her to do. 
If the child is unable to carry out a command then demonstrate it for him/her.
Re-present the command and have the child perform it.

4. Language Concepts - these are some of the early developmental language
concepts - same/different; big/little; many/some/more; round; come/go;
up/down; in/out; open/shut; stop/go; slow/fast; day/night; loud/soft;
Incorporate these concepts into kinder activities.

5. Language Structures - practise these:
(1) "ing" Verbs
(2) Prepositions - work on "in, on, under"
(3) Determiners/Quantifiers - work on "a, the, this, that, some, lots of/many" 
Encourage the child to use these words in his/her speech - many ESL children
seem to leave them out.
(4) Plural `s'
(5) Word Order/Sequencing - a child having difficulty with correct word order
in a sentence may be helped by repeating back the disordered sentence (with
appropriate puzzled facial expressions and gestures) and making a suggestion
as to possible correction of the sentence.
e.g. Child - "Put box in the bear".
Teacher - "Put box in the bear. (confused expression) I can't do that.
Do you mean - Put the bear in the box?"
Child - nods
Teacher - try saying it again - Put the bear in the box".
Child - "Put the bear in the box".

6. Reluctant Speakers - Some ESL children lack confidence in their English
skills so are reluctant to speak, particularly to an adult. It may eventuate
that a child more proficient in English will speak for the reluctant one.
This behaviour needs to be carefully monitored because even though the
proficient child is providing a good language model for the less proficient
child, the latter may come to rely on the other child to act as his/her
communicator without ever practising the modelled language structures
him/herself.
If this situation arises, it is appropriate to acknowledge the proficient
speaker's goodwill and seek his/her co-operation in helping the less proficient
speaker develop necessary language skills.
e.g. Teacher - "It's really good that you are helping Pin with her talking.
I like that, but we have to let her try talking by herself. Let her have
a try first. If she has trouble then you can help her. Perhaps she can copy
what you say. Let's try it".
Teacher - Pin, what's this?"
Pin - no response; looks at Tam for help.
Tam - "A ball. You say it Pin - a ball".
Pin - "A ball".
Teacher - "That's great".

