Salon design Lighting Psychology by Vincent de Lorenzo  

  Lighting a salon has long been the most neglected aspect of salon design.
  Despite the increasing attention given to furniture colour, fabrics and
finishes and the way they set the style and mood of a salon interior, lighting
has continued to be dominated by the despotism of a few spot lights or if
not that, just maintaining the present lighting with the salon space.
  Lighting is a technical subject that progresses in tandem with the
development of new kinds of light services. It is important also not to
lose sight of the fact that lighting is an art and that to master it properly
we need to apply a range of creative skills with taste and discrimination.

 The psychology  
The emotional dimension should never be overlooked and lighting is of
central importance in establishing mood. Just as sunny days can create a
feeling of elation, similarly an attractive indoor salon lighting scheme
rich in contrasts and points of interest can have a stimulating effect.
  For example, while shampooing a client at the basin, we need a high level
of lighting, but while doing the client's hair we are unlikely to want the
same bright lighting as at the basin.
  Also of interest is the way lighting can affect our appearance and behaviour.
By carefully adjusting the lights to control shadows and highlights cast
on people's faces, people can actually be made to look more attractive.
However, if the lights glow into our eyes or throw deep shadows over faces,
the effect will be unsettling; everyone will be put on their guard and the
conversation may flag. Not such a good point from the salon owner's viewpoint,
when they are promoting more client services in the salon.
  Important in the lighting design of a salon is the need to create an
atmosphere. The way in which we decorate our salons is one of the ways in
which we express our personalities. By means of colour, pattern and texture
and possessions such as fittings and furniture we make statements about
the kind of hairdressers we are and the way we live. Lighting has an important
part to play in supporting atmosphere. This is not just a matter of the
fittings themselves, although these make a conspicuous impact. Equally
significant is really the quality of light they produce. There are various
types of possible light fittings for a salon.

 Lighting hardware  
In the last ten years or so , the design of light fittings has entered
an exciting new phase characterised by innovation and elegance. Fittings
can determine the distribution of light by employing the principles of
reflection, diffusion or refraction. The shape of the fitting and the materials
of which it is constructed also have a crucial effect.

 Spot lighting  
During the 60s and 70s there was a general mania for spotlights, which
had a lot to do with the appeal of glistening metal and the quest for low
budget modernity.
 This vogue resulted in spots being used in salons in many quite unsuitable
positions. Their directional flexibility was insufficiently exploited and
the appearance often clashed with the style of their surrounds. Today in
salons some spotlights can appear very outdated. But it would be a pity
if changing fashions were to kill them off altogether.
  Provided they are sensitively deployed, spots are an important tool in
the art of lighting an interior.
  For example, they can provide strong contrasts of light and shade that
will bring a flat lighting scheme to life. Also, spots are invaluable for
your retail display lighting.
  In relationship to work stations it is recommended that two tracks for
spots should be installed one and a half metres from the walls either side
of a room to prevent `shadow fall'.

 Fluorescent tube  
Fluorescent lights have been available commercially since the end of World
War Two. They provide such an efficient way to convert electricity into
light that they have become the almost universal method of lighting shops
and offices. In an energy conscious era, the fact that a fluorescent tube
uses up to five times less electricity than a tungsten bulb to provide the
same amount of light would strike one as a compelling attraction. Fluorescent
tubes also radiate less heat and have a longer life.
 In general the main function is that of providing a high overall level
of light which on its own creates a flat shadowless effect.
 The general fluorescent tubes used in a salon should ideally be recessed
into the ceiling and have a light diffusing cover. The Philips series 80
Fluorescent Light Strips can provide excellent colour rendering.

 Downlighters  
Downlighters are essentially fittings that concentrate all the light output
downward into a room. The light takes the shape of a precisely controlled
beam whose profile is determined by the size and shape of the fitting, the
bulb and the disposition and character of the reflectors. Essentially you
should make use of downlighters if you prefer a darker ceiling tone, or
in a salon this could be over the lounge and reception areas of a salon
or any decorative salon photos.
  However, one word of caution with the use of downlighters - they can
be expensive, expecially if recessed into the ceiling.

 Duplicating daylight  
In salons today colour corrective lighting should be employed, especially
over the work space where hair colouring is carried out. Today most light
manufacturers produce a range of `Daylight Tubed Lighting'. For example,
Philips colour 47 duplicates 98 per cent daylight with no warm reflects.
This is an excellent colour corrective method of lighting. For white clinical
areas Philips colour 37 is recommended. This gives a much warmer atmosphere
and duplicates up to 96 per cent daylight.
  In summary, the following points are critical when considering the nature
of lighting a salon.
A. Assess the characteristics of your salon space.
B. Work out an appropriate lighting strategy - consider task lighting and
   mood lighting, weighing colour rendering and energy saving requirements.
C. Rooms used in daylight generally demand a careful attempt to make the
   best of available sunlight with pale coloured high reflective finishes on
   the wall and ceiling. (Semi gloss/gloss finish.)
D. Display lighting is especially important for take-home hair care areas.
E. Draw a lighting plan over the salon area and mark each fitting type.
F. Consult manufacturers' catalogues and price lists for downlighters and
   spotlights; use manufacturers' beam profiles to work out fittings suitable
   for particular needs.
  As a rule fluorescent tubes have a cool efficient feel conducive to work
while low level tungsten lighting creates a relaxed atmosphere.
  Remember: good looking light fittings never compensate for bad lighting.
  Finally, consider the use of a professional lighting designer. They use
a repertoire of tried and tested techniques from which we can all draw lessons
to apply to our salons.

