<subsample>
	<id> E28b </id>
	


	<source> Instyle Hair - September 1986 </source>
	


	<h> FORECAST </h>
	


	<h> Teacher retires after 50 years </h>
	
Bill Guy, a teacher at the Flagstaff College in Melbourne, has retired
after nearly 50 years in hairdressing.
  He began his hairdressing career in Devonport, Tasmania in 1937 as an
apprentice men's hairdresser with his uncle, and on completion, served in
World War 2 with the 1st Australian Naval Bombardment Group, then trained
as a ladies' hairdresser in Melbourne under the Government's rehabilitation
team.
  Then he went to work with a leading Melbourne salon, Ross Blain. After
a while he moved to the country, buying a salon in Coleraine where he stayed
for four years. Back in Melbourne he joined Alan Pass in Little Collins Street
with partner Pam Brettel. He joined the MLHA in the fifties and served as
vice president and chairman of the industrial sub-committee and also joined
the council of the Melbourne Technical College of Hairdressing, now Flagstaff
College.
  In 1969 he started teaching at the college and describes it as one of
the best decisions he ever made. In 1975 he was seconded, for six years,
to the Industrial Training Commission where the development of a common
syllabus was one of his interests.
  `I'm going to have a Claytons retirement,' Bill says. 'When I can be
gainfully employed by the college, I'll come back as a part-time teacher.
The rest of the time I'll spend in my hobby, the garden, on improving my
golf, and learning to play bowls.



	<h> Scissors cut in quick, simple </h>
	
Weston Imports is distributing a range of scissors created specifically
to cut modern, up to date styles. They revolutionise pointing, sliding and
thinning techniques and reduce time needed for a quicker cut and more
economical time usage.
  The scissors have a range of three cutting blades to achieve desired effects
but can also be used as ordinary scissors.
  The blades, designed by Dieter Keller, create different effects. The
scissors, called Jaguar*Jacuar I, II and III, have removable thumb rests and an
insert within the handles to overcome any metal sensitivity which some people
experience.
  Weston is also distributing a new drier from Wigo called the Brushblower.
It has a special attachment which allows the stylists to pick up the hair,
wrap it around the barrel of the drier and hot air blows through the barrel,
increasing the rate of styling and drying.


	<h> Modern praises Oz sales rate </h>
	
Ken Grogan, editor of the prestigious American industry magazine Modern
Salon, was impressed with the rate of our salon retail sales following his
discussions with a group of visiting Australians.
  Writing in the May issue of Modern, he said that the average of 30 to
35 per cent retail level of total dollar volume was '...at least three times
as good as our (US) percentages.'
  Talking with hairdressers in the Cortaville Associates tour of America
earlier this year, he realised the salon owners did not talk about 'retail'
but rather 'take home' products.
  In an article headed 'Salon take home - a different way of saying retailing',
Grogan acknowledged that merely changing terminology would not boost US
salon sales from 10 per cent to 35 per cent, but said it placed product
sales in a different perspective. Once a salon has convinced itself of the
value of selling products in conjunction with its services 'it's much, much
easier for the stylist not to sell merchandise to her client, but to suggest
she take it home with her,' he wrote.


	<h> Trichology course </h>
	
More and more demands are being placed on hairdressers to advise and
recommend treatment for hair and scalp disorders.
  TAFE External Studies in Brisbane is now offering an Introduction to
Trichology Course. This course has been designed for those persons who wish
to study some aspects of trichology before undertaking the comprehensive
program that leads to certification as a trichologist.
  All of the information in this course will relate to an understanding
of the complex systems which make up the mobile body, body systems, nutrition,
chemistry and physiology of the hair and skin.
  An average student could expect to spend approximately two to three hours
per week studying the course over a normal college year. A further two hours
maximum time is required to complete each of the five assignments. However,
these are only recommended times and students would be guided by their own
study habits, personal commitments and ability.


	<h> McKewins takes on Scottish videos </h>
	
McKewins has taken over the distribution of the hairdressing training
videos of Alan Stewart from the Rainbow Room.
  With cash and carry showrooms in Orange, Canberra, Coffs Harbour and
Crows Nest on Sydney's north shore, as well as its major store and head
office at Warners Bay in Newcastle, the wholesaler is marketing six videos
from Alan Stewart on cutting, colouring and perming.
  Video was an effective method for salon owners to provide additional training
assistance to senior and junior staff, Keith McKewin said. Videos provide
intense personal instruction on cutting and styling the newest looks, he
said.
  In the 16 years since he opened his first showroom, Keith has expanded
to service all of New South Wales and carries all leading salon products
as well as equipment for both hair and beauty salons and accessories for
beauty salons. 


</subsample>
