Employer bickering comes to a head By Pamela Williams Idealogical debate could reconcile the conflicting interests of members
of the Business Council  

When Carlton & United Breweries reached an early truce with unions in the
battle over superannuation a few weeks ago, cynics in the industrial relations
community pointed out that the company was an influential member of the
Business Council of Australia, which had vowed to resist any superannuation
deals.
  CUB chairman John Elliott came in for a lot of flak from other council
members. They were embarrassed by the deal, which came in the wake of strident
claims by the council's executive director, Geoff Allen, that the wind
had gone out of the unions' super campaign. Elliott and Elders IXL director
Ian McLachlan had been talking tough about superannuation and weak management.
  At the same time other members, particularly the chief executives of
ACI and Pacific Dunlop, were taking a lot of heat in the super battle and
the perception was that CUB had been very easily rolled. The animosity
to Elliott was spelled out by some in telexes, although the council took
no formal critical position. Soon after, Elliott called for the council
to be scrapped as unrepresentative of the business community.
  Elliott has been critical of the council before and has made it clear
he believes a Liberal government should not deal with the organisation.
But the pressure on Elliott is an indication of the dilemma facing the
council's members: how to resolve the conflict between the business council's
policy and public utterances, and the need finally to be answerable to their
company boards, whose needs sometimes fly in the face of council policy.
  As the council presses into the melee of everyday industrial relations,
some members are weighing up what is best for their own companies. On the
heels of Elliott's calls for the council to be scrapped, another member,
Colonial Mutual, reacted swiftly to a provocative full-page advertisement
placed in newspapers around the country by Geoff Allen. The advertisement,
approved by council members at a meeting Colonial Mutual did not attend,
was an open letter to ACTU president Simon Crean complaining about
trade union activity in general, and superannuation in particular.
  Before the day was out, Colonial Mutual and other council members contacted
the ACTU and major unions to disassociate themselves from the action. The
ACTU phones and telex machines ran hot. Another member from the insurance
industry, National Mutual, also wrote to a large number of unions to restate
its neutrality on the superannuation question. Colonial Mutual did not
send the business council a copy of its telexes to the unions.
  Geoff Allen is not discomfited by the fuss. "It's a demonstration that
the council is not going to be inhibited by a small minority view," he
says. "We take a very tough line on super, but companies can act pragmatically
in their own interests. They have to deal with their own particular industrial
problems. There is no inconsistency."
  Colonial Mutual's assistant general manager, Graham Rogers, told BRW he
considered the advertisement to have been just an unfortunate accident.
"If it were to become a developing view (the anti-union sentiment), we would
be in a more difficult position," he says. "If it's aberrant, we can live
with it." Rogers will be watching closely any further developments relating
to the view expressed last week by Geoff Allen that the attitudes of the
New Right had solid acceptance in the business community. Rogers says he
is unaware that any such consensus has been formed.
  "I'd have to say that is the view of an individual," Rogers says. "From
our point of view, we as an organisation would be very concerned if the
business council was developing an anti-union view. I don't believe that
is the case, but we will have to watch things. I think they need to decide
where they stand. I think until now the council has been fairly pragmatic,
and they'll need to weigh up that position. Our company won't be placed
in one or the other camp industrially."
  The superannuation campaign by the unions has created other headaches
for council members. The round table environment of the business council
exerts considerable peer group pressure on members, which has acted as a
disciplinary curb on companies prepared to deal with unions in a more
conciliatory fashion. They are under pressure to hold out for the good
of all, and must be seen to give in to union campaigns only after a major
battle involving big financial losses. Critics point to this as a face-saving
device.
  Unions point out that the recent agreement between Pacific Dunlop and
its unions was announced with accompanying statistics on the massive $6
million cost the company incurred through industrial action before striking
a deal. In fact, there is concern at the ACTU that some companies have
privately told unions that they must be seen to take a loss before they
can agree to any deals.
  The council has never divorced its interest in industrial relations from
its primary interest in the economy, but it has rarely engaged in the
nitty-gritty of negotiating wages and conditions on behalf of members,
preferring instead to leave the Confederation of Australian Industry to
present its submission to national wage cases. But last week's strong stand
by Geoff Allen on the question of the New Right is likely put some
council members in a difficult position with the unions in their companies.
  The clash over the New Right in the business community peaked when the
chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Manufactures,
Brian Powell, slammed what he called the "truly fascist tendencies" of the New
Right. Although some suggest that Powell misread the mood in his constituency
and went too far in his criticism, the outburst brought to a head the bickering
in the business and employer camps about whether to identify publicly with
the industrial crusaders of the H.R. Nicholls Society.
  Powell's sentiments were welcomed by the unions, who are watching closely
the links between moderate business and radicals such as the Australian
Federation of Employers. The federation's president, Andrew Hay, this
week issued a defamation writ against Powell. No sooner had Powell made
his comments about fascist tendencies than Geoff Allen took another tack,
claiming that many of the H.R. Nicholls Society's ideas have solid acceptance
in the business community.
  Powell has triggered an avalanche of decision-making in the business and
employer lobbies. His remarks have helped to crystallise opinion and have
brought new meaning to the term "employer disunity". Observers say it is
unlikely Allen would have made his remarks without consulting business council
members.
  Allen's comments are an indication that the idealogical debate could
reconcile the conflicting interests of Business Council members. The council
has long been a battleground for what one observer describes as "structural
clash" - that conflict of sectional interests that has caused the crucial
economic brawl in Australia, between the farming, mining and commercial
interests who believe they underpin the economy, and the protected industries
such as cars, textiles, clothing and footwear and manufacturing generally,
who are assisted by the Government.
  In the business council, this battle has been politely played out between
the mining and manufacturing interests. It has been a careful balancing
act for Geoff Allen, and has been successfully juggled largely as a result
of a gentlemen's agreement between members not to push each other too far.
Council members are aware of each others' vital areas of interest and they
know that each will act for his own company's survival in the final analysis.
The need to finally seek a common position in the idealogical debate may
iron out some of these differences.
  As a collection of businessmen, the Business Council has a real advantage
in being able to put forward ideas and issues for discussion. Prime Minister
Bob Hawke and Treasurer Paul Keating have responded to the high profile
of members. Hawke prefers the immediate contact at this level to the need
to go through the layers of consultation with other employer
organisations.
  Council members are said to be highly susceptible to Hawke, who has always
had a fascination with big business and a rapport with chief executives.
The Government has sometimes found it easier to convince the council to
take a reasonable attitude and then used this as a stick to bring the peak
employer organisation, the Confederation of Australian Industry, into line.
  Geoff Allen says the close links the council has with the Government's
advisory networks have created some points of tension with the council's
original aims. "We are absolutely determined to be taking a long view and
a consistent forward-looking approach; not to be buffetted by ad hoc responses
to crisis," he says. "At the same time, the role thrust on us as activists
in immediate debates is constantly threatening to pull the organisation
away from longer-term issues." To deal with this, the council works on its
long-term policy objectives to provide "a light on the hill" by which to
judge short-term policy.
  Observers have described the council as an elite club for individuals
used to getting their own way. Others say it is a paper machine, wasting
trees. They pose the question: "What does the business council believe in?"
Allen himself is stumped when asked about the council's identity, and says
it is a question for observers.
  Bob Hawke is clearly prepared to deal the council in as half of the
employers' camp. The council has capitalised on the relationship with the
Government by hiring key operators from the upper echelons of the Treasury
as analysts and advisers. But as the council wades deeper into the waters
of industrial relations, albeit in response to the flattering invitations
of the Prime Minister, its ability to make a practical commitment and deliver
its members will be increasingly under the microscope.

