<subsample>
	<id> E30a </id>
	


	<source> Australasian Baking - November/December 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Equipment </h>
	


	<h> Versatile conveyor system </h>
	
The Capway conveyor system, manufactured in Holland and widely used by
bakers and pastrycooks in the UK, Europe and the US is now available in
Australia.                                                              
  The system consists of a wire rod belt (200 to 500 mm wide) and two
supporting chains.
  Belts come in three basic patterns to suit varying products being conveyed
and may be custom made to suit any particular problem.
  It is a system which can be completely integrated with existing or new
equipment, from the world's leading manufacturer's of baking equipment.
  Capway's versatile design carries dough as it proved to the oven.
  If desired it may be extended as a cooling tower up to 10 tiers high.
  In the proving tower configuration, dough enters the system at the first
level and is gradually conveyed to the top of the tower on the outside edge,
then down an equal number of tiers on the inside of the tower, then onto
the oven.
  The time spent in the proving tower may be pre-determined for each batch
as required.
  The drive unit consists of two wheels, of special cost steel, mounted
on a shaft driven by a general motor mounted on the shaft or by chain
transmission.
  Stretching of the rod belts are regulated by tensioner on the driven units.
  Straight and curved conveyor sections are built with two special aluminium
side profiles, which may be adjusted to the correct belt width by aluminium
rods and on each curve.
  The belt runs through specially designed plastic nails; this ensures smooth
operation.
  Simplicity of installation and operation is evident, with the tail unit
comprising two steel side plates with a fired steel shaft separating them.
  The steel shaft has two steel pulley wheels with bearings on which the
chains run.
  Unlimited length of run can be achieved by the use of intermediate drive
units.
  The flexibility of Capway allows the use of a single conveyor system which
incorporates straight, curved sections which can incline and/or decline
without interruption to the movement of the belt and more importantly the
product being conveyed.
  Capway is used worldwide by pastry and cake manufacturers as well as luscant
makers and confectioners.



	<h> Automatic conveyor </h>
	
The AZA bulk handling system, manufactured in Italy, was originally designed
to carry livestock feed, but over the last six years, has been modified
so that it may be used in flour mills, bakeries and other human food conveying
systems.
  It is a simple, versatile, automatic system, and flexible enough to convey
products as diverse as talcum powder to rice bubbles to 7-10 mm sized pellets.
  The main elements of the units are a totally enclosed stainless steel
tube and stainless steel cable with nylon discs which slowly pull the products
through the tubing.
  The flexible cable can move through 180 deg corners up to 450 m in each
system but still does not &quot;deblind&quot; pre-mixed product or cause segregation
of particle size.
  AZA cable systems are commonly used to transfer raw materials from storage
silos to the mill area and even dust from cyclones to outside disposal areas.
  The system is totally enclosed which reduces duct and the risk of
contamination, is virtually silent, which makes it attractive from a noise
pollution point of view.
  AZA systems are driven by motors up to a maximum of 2.24 kW (3 hp) which
again means low operating costs.
  AZA does the job automatically, efficiently and effectively at an economical
price.



	<h> Automated Danish and puff pastry production </h>
	
Continuous automated production of Danish or puff pastries is now possible
with the Rheon MM system, Greer division.
  The MM line is also capable of producing puff pastry using low melting-point
fats.
  The heart of the system is the &quot;compound nozzle&quot;  of the MM laminator,
which prepares the layers of fat and dough.
  The nozzle continuously co-extrudes a tube of dough with fat on the inner
surface.
  When this hollow tube of dough and fat is spread sideways, a continuous
layer of fat and dough of even thickness is formed.
  This layer is continuously folded before proceeding to the stretching
stage which forms the dough, in one operation, into a thin unbroken sheet
ranging from 3 to 30 mm in thickness.
  The stretching operation is performed by the Rheon SM stretcher, a special
rolling mechanism which compresses the dough into sheets without the severe
friction and localised stresses associated with the conventional double
roller system - resulting in the accurate production of puff pastry with
perfect layering - without having to retard the dough several times during
the manufacturing process, as is the case with the conventional roller of
sheeter table systems.
  After stretching, the continuous stream of dough is automatically made
up into individual products by means of a range of optional devices.
  The MM line will work equally well with a tough pizza dough, a delicate
Danish dough, a wet bread dough, a tender pie dough or a fragile puff dough
and still surpass handmade quality.


</subsample>
