Bread pan care in the bakery By PHIL MARTIN, managing director, Mackies Pty Ltd.  

  Your investment in baking pans is a major one, by the fact that to achieve
the desired output, a quantity of pans or pan sets must be purchased.
  One individual set of pans does not cost a great deal of money, by today's
standards.
  However, multiply by the quantity needed to bake to the oven's capacity,
and the monetary numbers change dramatically.
  Yet in so many bakeries there appears to be an attitude of: "well, we have
plenty of these, it doesn't matter if we knock a few around" or "let's take
our temper out on the bread pans when there is an oven or mechanical jam
up, resulting in a break down, or "let's throw some around because we have
plenty more".
  Go into most bakeries and you can hear the damage happening.
  So many times have I heard the comments "they don't make bread pans like they
used to" or "the material is different, they don't seem to stand up to the
temperature like they used to".
  I can assure you they are as strong as, and  stronger than, they used
to be, and there are many variations of strengthening accessories, which
can be added to, or built in, to suit the potential damage points in the
individual bakery, without drastically adding to the weight of the pan set.
  Let's put the initial pan cost and the damage to one side for a moment.
  What about the product's shape, what about the function of the baking
pan in terms of easy and smooth reliable release, so that cripples are not
created at the point of depanning.
  For each loaf lost is an unretrievable cost.
  After all, the whole aim in the commercial production of bread is to present
a product that is not only good quality and good to eat, but of good appearance
in shape and colour with maximum sales appeal.
  A baking pan is a mould just like a casting mould.
  The shape of the casting is caused by the mould shape after the pattern
has been removed.
  The same thing happens with baked product.
  The shape of the pan is determined by the die or tool it is made with.
  This is, in effect, the pattern which determines the shape and size of
the pan.
  The shape of the pan is the shape of the loaf. 
  If the pans are all mis-shapen and bent from ill-treatment and lack of maintenance,
then that is the shape the bread will be.
  Excercising pan care by regular maintenance can reduce excessive damage
and wear.
  Tighter control and communication with employees involved with pan handling,
regular correcting adjustments of conveyors and mechanical equipment all
help to keep your investment in the shape they were in at the start.
  Regular pan maintenance should not be regarded as an additional cost.
  The better you keep your pans, the better the ongoing results you will
enjoy with more uniform and consistent shape.
  Better shaped product not only has better eye appeal, it gives fewer problems
at the bagging machines, it packs into plastic crates and containers more
evenly and easily, it looks better at the point of sale.
  Well kept and clean pans ensure numerous advantages and savings, such
as less costly mechanical hiccups - clean pans with a well maintained baking
surface use far less energy, which, over 12 months in an average size oven,
is mind boggling in cost savings.
  There are oil savings because well maintained pans release product easily.
  Frustrations among bakery personnel are significantly reduced when pans
are easy to stack and unstack.
  If you start off with the right pans with the right sort of finish - and
what I mean by the right sort of finish - is not whether the pans are made
from tinplate or aluminium coated steel (steelumat) rather I am referring
to the additional advantage of factory conditioning.
  Factory conditioning is the term we use as pan manufacturers, which most
bakers would refer to as "burning in" or "greening".
  About 30 years ago, it was the accepted thing for baking pans to be delivered
or supplied to the bakery, made from shiny tinplate.
  The procedure then was to take delivery several days before the pans could
be successfully used, and subject them to a burning in process to make them
ready to produce an acceptably coloured product.
  The reflective nature of the new metal surface would not readily absorb
heat and transfer it to the loaf crust, and without burning in or conditioning
the pans, it was, not impossible, but very difficult to bake a loaf with
good crust colour.
  The burning in process within the bakery was to apply huge amounts of
lard, mostly by hand, place the pans in the oven and apply excessive heat
in an attempt to actually darken or blacken the pans by burning.
  With the presence of a fairly liberal amount of tin on the metal surface,
because in those days the tin was applied by the hot dip process, (no longer
available) and the absence of the insulating effect of the dough piece,
the pans in most cases suffered damage which was irreparable.
  As a result of this continued problem, much experimenting was carried out
which resulted in the development of what was to become known as RK47.
  RK47 a black mineral based coating, was a relatively simple, in principle,
invention or discovery, which took some modification to cure the problem
of smoking odours in the oven.
  The addition of RK47 to the outside of the baking pans completely cancelled
the need to burn in new bread pans.
  In fact I would say there are many bakers who, because they weren't around
in the era of having to burn in baking pans, would automatically accept
it as natural as feathers on a chicken, because until recently they have
known nothing different.
  Black RK47 simply absorbs heat quickly and transfers that heat to the
dough piece, sealing it quickly to produce a golden colour and reduce the
tendency for sticking.
  At around the same time in the US, a silicone resin release coating was
being developed, in combination with an electrochemical oxidisation process,
which was and still is, administered to the outer skin of the tin coating,
both on the inside as well as the outside of the pan.
  This oxidisation procedure causes the outer surface of the tin coating
to darken and turn a characteristically deep olive green, the principle
of which is also to absorb heat quickly as well as being compatible with
the application of silicon panglaze.
  This process is a permanent colour that, unlike RK47, does not wash off
or strip when pans are being cleaned during the stripping and reglaze cycles,
so important to the success of panglaze efficiency.
  Oxidisation of the coated surface or Bake-Rite Colorkote as it is now
known in Australia, is a very efficient way of factory conditioning baking
pans.
  It simply means what it says - you Bake-Rite if you Colorkote, and with
the combination of silicon non-stick coating, better known as panglaze,
many more advantages are within the baker's reach, right from the first use
of the pans.

