<sample>
	<id> E31 </id>
	


	<source> New Doctor - 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2013 words </note>
	


	<h> Doctors as certifiers of incapacity </h>
	


	<bl> By Ian Webster  </bl>
	

  I could have been in Australia in December 1983 as I watched London's
Granada Television. Through interviews with disabled people, their relatives
and their doctors, WORLD IN ACTION examined claims that the UK government
was cracking down in invalidity benefits by declaring sick people fit for
work. Four years earlier Australia's crackdown had removed 30 thousand in
one year from its list!
  The program showed how the assessments and opinions of GPs, spouses and
workmates were widely disparate from the official line. To one supervisor
the suggestion that his workmate was a malingerer was rejected as rubbish;
given half the chance, he would happily employ more men of his mate's calibre.
This worker died on his way to yet another of a sequence of DHSS medical
examinations.
  An official of the Miner's union, experienced at fighting appeals for
his members, described the legislation as pernicious; it attacked people
unable to defend themselves, and by disallowing the benefit reduced them to
abject poverty.
  The Minister for Health and Social Security denied that decisions were
made on financial and not medical grounds to transfer people from the sick
list to the dole queue. No, the medical guidelines had not been changed,
he said. The problem was the high levels of unemployment and lack of jobs.
  As this journal pointed out at the time, the Australian events were uncannily
similar. The precipitous fall in invalid pensions granted between 1979 and
1982 is shown in fig. 1. The differences with the UK were that the medical
guidelines here were shifted subtlely from the concept of (social) disability
to medical impairments with remarkable compliance of the medical profession.
And there was no right of appeal for those disenfranchised from their
entitlements by these actions.
  In Australia the Minister and Social Security officials protested that
nothing had changed - but they failed to explain the plummeting number of
grants (see fig.1). The profession remained strangely silent. It took a
public outcry from the Australian Council of Social Services, disabled
persons and some lawyers and doctors, assisted by Graham Williams of the
Sydney Morning Herald, before the Government responded. Appeal mechanisms
were introduced and the medical guidelines reversed to the previous criteria.
The situation is still not good but an improvement, nevertheless. The
Handicapped Programs Review (1985) and the Disability Advisory Council of
Australia, and many other bodies, want the Invalid Pension reviewed and
replaced by other provisions.
  Although doctors may not realise it, indeed many deny it, their decisions
are central to how social policy is implemented. The doctor's statutory
and legal capacity to certify incapacity controls access to sickness benefits,
workers' compensation, legal damages, invalid pensions, repatriation benefits
and pensions, as well as social assistance in housing, education, transport
and other areas. All citizens potentially may be affected. Is society justified
in entrusting this area of decisionmaking to us?
 

	<h> What are the questions? </h>
	

When certifying incapacity, say, for work, the doctor is presented with
explicit and implicit questions. The explicit questions make proper use
of medical skills and often require additional knowledge and skills: whereas
the unstated questions potentially subvert the medical role.
  The medical opinion is used (1) to test the truth of the person's claims,
(2) to diagnose the cause, again to test veracity but also to assess severity,
(3) to measure the severity of impairment(s), and (4) to describe the disabling
and handicapping effects on the person. Some of these are more important
to the courts than to the welfare system. For example, in negligence the
search for cause and &quot;truth&quot; assumes importance: but even the welfare system
takes an interest in such questions if the claimant can be blamed, as with
alcoholism.


	<h> A medical skill? </h>
	

Doctors are pretty good at judging a story and whether it hangs together and 
fits with a person's current state; that is what we understand to be the art 
of consultation and diagnosis. Doctors are expected to be open, accepting, 
indeed gullible, when unravelling a person's predicament and condition (this 
is known very well by drug addicts). But trust and truthfulness underpin this 
process; and if confidence is lost, or doubts cast, a medical history becomes 
valueless. On the other hand, cultivation of a healthy suspicion and respect 
for facts is essential for astute diagnosis - especially when dealing with 
confused patients. However, to maintain an ubiquitous state of suspicion would 
be a stressful way to practice medicine, bordering on paranoia. Under these 
circumstances, if evidence is required about the onset of a person's injury or 
illness and its effects on their activities, this could be provided by others 
better placed than the doctor to do so.
  In my opinion, it is unreasonable and unfair to cast the doctor as the
arbiter of truth, as he/she cannot claim this expertise. The AMA advises
that when writing a certificate to attest only to facts which can be observed
or validated and recommends that medical history data should be reported
as &quot;the patient stated ...&quot;, or similar wording.
  The doctor is expected to make a diagnosis. This is relevant in assessing
an underlying cause. It also contributes to understanding the nature of
incapacity and the severity of disability and handicap.
  For the disabled person seeking compensation or welfare benefits the effect
on their working and daily living activities is the critical issue. Invalid
pension legislation defines the threshold for invalidity at &quot;85 per cent
incapacity for work&quot;: whereas compensation legislation has a range of
incapacity levels which may be compensated for, as well as lump sums for
particular losses.
  In these circumstances, the severity of incapacity has to be assessed
and certified. The decision goes beyond diagnosis to include the effects
on human functioning: ability to get about, to work, socialise, be independent
and to be economically self-sufficient. The judgement is about who is to
be paid money and whether this adequately compensates the person for losses
(of pain and suffering) or, in the case of welfare benefits, prevents the
descent into poverty.
 Decisions in this domain incorporate the social world, a knowledge of the
availability of work and social welfare. Can the doctor tread these health
and social boundaries?
  In medical school the assessment of organ damage and dysfunction is taught:
restriction, pain and stiffness of joints, limitation of exercise tolerance
and respiratory impairments. These are the first steps to comprehensive
assessment of disability and handicap; thus medical practitioners have
a fundamental contribution to make in the assessment of disability.
  The recent moves to define and codify disability reflect a concern with
the whole person and their social status. Herein lies a real practical
expression of trendy &quot;wholistic medicine&quot; which all doctors can adopt. The
current moves towards comprehensive assessment and the team approach parallel
these developments.
  Is certifying incapacity a specialist or generalist function? Medical
specialisation is oriented to organ systems, new technologies or special
need groups, for example, the specialities of cardiology, radiology,
paediatrics and geriatrics. The eclectic whole-person approach of the &quot;old
time&quot; GP seems more appropriate for disability assessment than this. Frankly,
some of the decisions made by specialists appear severe and oriented to
physical impairment and less to actual functioning.
  The American Review of Respiratory Diseases in 1980 showed that respiratory
standards for compensation or social security purposes were extremely severe
and inappropriate for patients with interstitial lung disease - to fulfil
some of the criteria many patients would be nigh unto death. Specialists
see people who are referred in clinical and not community contexts with
diseases affecting the organ systems of their special expertise. We know
that chronic diseases often affect several organ systems. How does one fit
together partial deafness from childhood, moderate breathlessness, and some
arthritis in a person who has never learnt to read or write? From the medical
point of view these judgements require the wisdom and sensitivity of an
experienced and broadly educated practitioner.
  Should there be specialist assessors? A review of invalid pension
administration showed that the GP's opinion is likely to be upheld against
the full-time Commonwealth Medical Officer's when the decision is contested
before an independent tribunal. In addition, part-time CMOs' decisions,
often GPs brought in for this purpose, were frequently upheld against the
full-time CMO's.


	<h> A team of assessors? </h>
	

The Woodhouse Report (1974) proposed a radical reform for compensation in
Australia. It made a distinction between the medical function of measuring
impairment and the administrative function of determining incapacity. Since
that time, our understanding of disability has advanced and comprehensive
assessment is the favoured approach. It has now a solid place in the philosophy
of aged care and in assessing childhood handicaps.
  To be done well, and it must be if another form of social control of 
disadvantaged people is not to be imposed, assessment will require extra
professional personnel and be time-consuming. If, as many hope, assessment
becomes the linchpin of geriatrics, rehabilitation, occupational health,
management of alcohol and drug dependence and in certifying incapacity and
sickness, it is most unlikely that enough resources will be available.
Certifying sickness (temporary incapacity) and the major part of certifying
invalidity is likely to remain a primary function of medical practitioners.
  Added to the resource question is that of medico-legal liability. As welfare
and patients rights movements strengthen, legal contest over decisions of
this kind will increase. New South Wales doctors now pay upwards of $900
per year for medical liability insurance to cope with  rising litigation;
other professions may not be so willing to accept these costs.


	<h> Assessment of needs versus eligibility criteria </h>
	

An important issue raised by the increasing use of assessment teams is
that needs assessment will become directly linked to deciding whether a
person is elibible for government assistance or access to government-funded
facilities. In the past society has taken steps to separate medical and
administrative functions. It is the judge and jury which decide the extent
of damages on hearing the medical evidence in the courts. In occupational
medicine, in assessing persons for insurance and pensions, this separation
has been strict, especially excluding the treating doctor from the eligibility
process. This does not gainsay the value of the treating doctor's opinion
and perspective!


	<h> Ethics </h>
	

In medical ethics the primacy of the patient's needs runs counter to the
imposed role of the doctor as a gatekeeper to the welfare system. Set against
this the wider interests of the community and accountability. In addition
there is the conflicting loyalty to the employing authority and to the claimant
citizen. It is critical that the medical judgement should be independent
- the true stance of a professional.
  I think the conflict of loyalties can only be reconciled by separating
needs assessment and responsibility for care from deciding eligibility for
government or third party provision. I have no doubt they should be linked
but independent decisions. For example, needs assessment should be done
first and its results fed into the eligibility process, the final decisions
for which should not be medical.


	<h> Conclusion </h>
	

I once said to a professor of law that a medical practitioner should be
an advocate. He disagreed. He viewed medical practitioners as independent,
unbiased arbiters of health, sickness and need. His concept of a legal advocate
did not gel with my idea. The legal advocate presents his client's case
persuasively to get the best deal for him: a contest according to the rules
of law. The doctor, however, needs only to be honest to act as an advocate
for individuals or communities. There is so much injustice in the social
system, of the kind I have described above, that to be fair is to be an
advocate!
  Is this the scenario fanciful? To be realistic, medical conceptions will
need to reflect concerns with social justice and welfare if medicine is
to contribute in ways I have proposed. Of the purpose of medicine, Theodore
Fox, a distinguished editor of the Lancet, said: &quot;Our purpose is to enlarge
human freedom to set people free so far as we can from disability and suffering.
  Although these ideas struggle for a place in contemporary medicine -
they are not foreign. 


</sample>
