<subsample>
	<id> E32a </id>
	


	<source> Australian Accountant - November 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Freedom of information: obtaining information from the
Commmissioner*Commissioner </h>
	


	<bl> By Chris Butler </bl>
	

Traditionally, information interaction between the Commissioner of Taxation
and the taxpayer has been kept to a bare minimum. Rarely has either party
been willing to provide information to the other, prior to a judicial
confrontation.
  However, in recent history, the taxpayer has been given significant
consessions in obtaining information from the Commissioner.
  Information can generally be obtained from the Commissioner by way of
the following legislation:
‚2 Income Tax Assessment Act (1936) as amended.
‚2 Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977.
‚2 Freedom of Information Act 1982.
  The Income Tax Assessment Act contains various provisions for dealing
with the Commissioner, most notably in the areas of secrecy, assessment
and objection procedures. However, the major concessions have been provided
by the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act and the Freedom of
Information Act concerning the Commissioner's application of the Income
Tax Assessment Act and regulations.
  To some degree the Commissioner has participated in this spirit of
co-operation by way of publishing Income Tax Rulings on specific topics.
While these statements are useful in determining broad attitudes and policies,
the major benefits of gaining additional information occur in direct contests
between taxpayers and the taxation Office. This issue is of growing importance
in view of the ever increasing number of tax audits.


	<h> The Income Tax Assessment Act (ITAA) </h>
	

	<h> Secrecy </h>
	
Employees of the Commonwealth or a State who acquire information about the
affairs of taxpayers are required to maintain confidentiality (s16).
  The officer may only disclose such information in the performance of his
or her duties or if authorised by a Taxation Commissioner to communicate
information to authorised recipients such as a Royal Commission. Similarly,
disclosure to a court is only possible when it is necessary to carry into
effect provisions of the ITAA or a State income tax law. The penalty for
contravention of these secrecy provisions is $5,000 and/or 12 months
imprisonment.


	<h> Assessments </h>
	
The provision by the Commissioner of income tax assessments represents the
most vital information (ie - income tax assessed) that a taxpayer will receive.
It is the additional descriptions and explanation for adjustments to income
as returned which cause the most significant problems.
  A taxpayer has limited rights to force the Commissioner to make an 
assessment of income tax. If an assessment does not issue within 12 months of 
lodgement then a request to make the assessment may be made. However, there 
is no statutory right to insist on the making of an assessment.
  Similarly, when an amended assessment issues at the Commissioner's
initiation (ie - not resulting from a tax-payer's objection eg - a tax audit)
the Commissioner is under no obligation to provide an adjustment sheet
disclosing the basis on which taxable income is varied (Lancey Shipping
Co).
  This is so even where the amended assessment decreases net taxable income
but includes disallowances of items which a taxpayer may wish to object
against.


	<h> Objections </h>
	
The taxpayer has more power to obtain information when an objection is lodged
within 60 days of the date of an assessment or amended assessment. Although
no time limit applies in making his decision a written notice of the
Commissioner's decision must be served on the taxpayer. Additionally,
an explanation of any adjustments made in an amended assessment is essential.
(Trautwein's case).
  Accordingly, because of secrecy requirements imposed on government
officials and the limited rights available in relation to assessments and
objections, the Income Tax Assessment Act, although providing basic
fundamental information, has only limited capacity to produce more detailed
informaton for taxpayers upon request.

The Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act (ADJR)
Generally, the ADJR Act may be invoked when a decision of an administrative
nature is made under a Commonwealth enactment. However, some forms of
decisions are expressly excluded from review. The major exclusion can
be summarised as being a decision referable to any assessment or calculation
of tax concerning income tax or sales tax. This exclusion is supported in
cases where decisions were found not to be reviewable in relation to: the
refusal to give reasons for disallowing an objection that was initially
withdrawn by the taxpayer (Higgs v FCT); and the refusal of the Commissioner
to refer a decision to a Board in the absence of a request from the taxpayer
to refer the decision (Raccuia &amp; Anon v DFCT).
  Applications to review administrative decisions are made under the ADJR
Act to the Federal Court for order of review. Applications must be made
within 28 days from the time of notification of the decision and the cost
of the review is at least $1,000.
 The major grounds for review include denial of natural justice, lack of
jurisdiction, improper exercise of power, error of law involved, decision
affected by fraud, irrelevant consideration or an exercise of discretionary
power in bad faith.
  Successful applications under the ADJR Act have included cases involving
the refusal to grant a sales tax exemption certificate (Bayford Wholesalers
P/L); additional time for making a sufficient distribution (Intervest
Corporation P/L); extension of withholding tax exemption (Mercantile Credits
Ltd); extension of time to pay tax (Ahern v DFCT); decision to institute
recovery proceedings (The Hells Angels Ltd (No 4), Terruk P/L, Manners);
notice to person owing money to taxpayer (Huston v DFCT); the time constraints
of notice requiring information (Clarke &amp; Kahn); and the refusal to grant
extension to a tax agent under the standard lodgement program (Balnaves
v DFCT).
  Accordingly, the Commissioner's exercise of discretion may be reviewed
under the ADJR Act in many instances with the notable exceptions of decisions
referable to assessments or calculation of tax. Other discretions which
may well be open to challenge are the grant of a substituted accounting
period, the remission of additional tax for late payment and the satisfying
of the Commissioner that a taxpayer's permanent or usual place of abode
is outside Australia.
  It can therefore be seen that the ADJR Act substantially expands the
provisions of the ITAA in obtaining information. For example, the limited
requirements to provide a notice of decision of objection under the ITAA
are expanded by the ADJR so that the Commissioner is obliged to explain
any adjustments.


	<h> The Freedom of Information Act (FOI) </h>
	
The FOI Act provides a statutory right of access to Commonwealth Government
documents to every person. No special interest needs to be demonstrated
in order to access the documents. Clearly, this provides a powerful tool
to the taxpayer to obtain information from the Commissioner.
  Requests for documents must be in writing and be sufficiently detailed
to enable identification of the document. A request must be responded to
within 45 days for requests before 1 December 1986 and within 30 days for
requests thereafter.
  However, certain documents are not discoverable under the FOI Act. These
include documents pre-dating 1 December 1977 unless they relate to the
applicant's personal affairs or are reasonably necessary to enable a proper
understanding of other documents discovered by the applicant.
  Exempt documents also include cabinet documents, internal working
documents, national security, protection of public safety, confidential
documents and documents to which security provisions of other laws apply
(eg - s16 of the ITAA). However, where access to documents is denied, a
review of that decision is available through various avenues.
  An initial application can be made under the FOI Act to the principal officer
of the relevant department within 28 days of receiving notice of the decision.
The result of the officer's decision is required within 14 days of the
application. A further request for review by the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT) can then be lodged within 60 days of the subsequent refusal
by the principal officer. The ADJR Act then allows further appeal to the
Federal Court within 28 days of the AAT's decision. In addition to this
review procedure, the Commonwealth Ombudsman can investigate and report
on complaints and make recommendations to the relevant authorities.
  The decision in Murtagh v FCT provides an interesting insight into the
powers afforded to the taxpayer under the FOI Act. The taxpayer sought
access to  copies of all records relating to the assessment of her returns
for three years. Access was denied by the Commissioner who claimed the
information was contained in internal working documents and therefore exempt.
Arguments were raised by the Commissioner that the denial of access was
to protect its officers; promote the candid consideration of alternatives;
protect the public from premature exposure to discussions before the
settlement of policies; and protect decision makers to continue to make
uninhibited recommendations.
  In what proved to be a major victory to the taxpayer it was held that
the assessments were routine in nature not containing any element of special
sensitivity. It was accepted that the ITAA and Regulations make little
provision for informing taxpayers of the reasons and evidence used in making
assessments. It was considered highly undesirable for negotiation purposes
for the Taxation Office and the taxpayer to deal in a `mutual halflight'.
It was considered that the granting of documents which disclose the factual
basis on which the Taxation Office has proceeded would advance the process
of resolving disputes.
  There are further victories for the taxpayer in obtaining information
under the FOI Act to which the Commissioner had denied access. The unsuccessful
grounds for denial include legal profession privilege, breach of confidence,
prejudicing the enforcement or proper administration of the law and the
proper and efficient conduct of the operations of a government department.


	<h> Conclusion </h>
	
With the introduction of recent statutes the taxpayer is now in a much stronger
position to obtain information from the Commissioner. This should substantially
aid the negotiation procedures between the taxpayer and the Commissioner
and hopefully produce a more productive network for mediation.
  In addition, reference should be made to the removal of the jurisdiction
of the Boards of Review to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). This
will have an important bearing on the ability of taxpayers to secure
additional information as the AAT operates under recognised rules of court
which include the power of discovery of documents.


</subsample>
