<sample>
	<id> E34 </id>
	


	<source> Engineers Australia - June 13, 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2008 words </note>
	


	<h> Highway one </h>
	


	<h> RMIT helps give computer chips a better memory </h>
	

The Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology has joined a project to
revolutionise computer memories by producing commercial high-speed,
non-volatile memory devices for computer chips.
  The project is based on a technology called Rampac which uses a thin film
of the ferroelectric material potassium nitrate to store information on
standard silicon or gallium arsenide chips.
  Rampac was developed by Ramtron Corp, a US subsidiary of the Sydney
technology-transfer company Newtech Development Corp. Ramtron staff worked
with engineers at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs to prove
the technology on a laboratory scale.
  Newtech is now setting up a company in Victoria to manufacture the memory
devices which are known by the acronym FRAM (ferroelectric random access
memory). The company will be strictly a manufacturer, and all further R&amp;D
and testing will be carried out by 2 groups at RMIT - the Microelectronics
Technology Centre and the Centre for Industrial Microelectronics Applications.
  MTC director Dr Jim Williams said RMIT is still negotiating a contract
with Newtech but the 2 groups are likely to earn $1-2 million for contract
R&amp;D and design assistance.
  Total investment in the project over the first 2 years will be about $25
million.
  Rampac represents a major breakthrough in the search for memory chips
that do not lose their stored information when power supply is cut off.
This characteristic, known as non-volatility, is currently available only
from slow and relatively expensive magnetic bubble and PROM (programmable
read-only memory) devices. These take milliseconds or microseconds to store
1 bit of information. FRAM, by contrast, takes about 15ns.
  Williams said the lack of high-speed, non-volatile memories is what has
prevented widespread use of chips in environments where continuous power
supply is not guaranteed - for example in condition-monitoring systems in
cars.
  Successful development of FRAM would solve that problem and put Australia
in a leading position in the non-volatile RAM market, which he estimates
will be worth about $16 billion by 1990.
  The feasibility of Rampac technology was first demonstrated by George
Rohrer, an engineer in the US doing research on ferroelectric materials,
which can be switched between 2 polarised states by voltages passing through
them. Ferroelectric materials remain polarised even when power is cut off.
  Most of these materials lose their ferroelectric properties when they
are reduced to thin films. But Rohrer found that potassium nitrate, which
normally is ferroelectric only at high temperatures, also has a ferroelectric
phase in thin-film form at room temperature.
  Equally exciting was his discovery that KNO#;3 can be switched between states
of polarisation by an input of less than 5V, much less than is required
for other ferroelectric materials. And when the film is partitioned into
tiny cells, each cell can be polarised individually - the basic principle
of microprocessor memory cells.
  Rohrer was negotiating to sell the rights to his technology to General
Motors when Ross Lyndon-James, executive chairman of Newtech, stepped in
and bought them instead.
  Newtech set up Ramtron Corp in the US rather than Australia because of
doubts about Australia's capacity to develop such an important and
sophisticated technology. However, now that several technical milestones
have been reached, including production of a prototype 1kb memory array
for General Motors, Newtech and its backers feel confident enough to bring
the technology to Australia.
  The new factory will initially make memory devices and put them on
conventional silicon or gallium arsenide chips made in the US. It is expected
to turn out about 10,000 chips/week after 2 years.
  A longer-term goal is to manufacture the entire chip assemblies in Australia.
  Williams said State Government incentives and proximity to RMIT were
the reasons for the new factory being located in Victoria.
  &quot;RMIT has a unique combination of the facilities and capabilities needed,
both for chip design and for depositing and characterising thin films,&quot;
he said.
  RMIT's involvement will include design of the chips to be made overseas,
materials testing and assessment, testing the initial memory arrays and
general troubleshooting.


	<h> QEC helps repair damage from cyclone </h>
	
The Queensland Electricity Commission is providing the Solomon Islands
Electricity Authority with powerline steel structures to repair damage caused
by cyclone Namu.
  After receiving a request for assistance from the Solomon Islands, the
QEC found it had 2 suitable steel structures for a construction project
that could be supplied to the Solomon Islands without affecting the local
completion date.
  The cyclone brought down a 33,000V transmission line that supplied a rice
mill, major sawmills and a large residential area.
  The steel structures are needed for a river crossing where an island was
washed away and a new powerline span of 700m is needed.
  The QEC is also supplying the services of a surveyor to supervise the
construction work.


	<h> Third Aussat launch date up in the air </h>
	
The launch date of Aussat 3 may be delayed by up to 6 months following
the failure of the recent Ariane mission.
  The Ariane rocket and its satellite payload had to be blown up by mission
control in French Guyana when the third stage of the rocket failed to ignite.
  A committee of investigation will be set up by Arianespace by the end
of this month.
  The third Aussat satellite was due to be launched on Aug 12. Aussat spokesman
Leighton Farrell said a delay of up to 6 months will not worry the company
which, however, is still confident Aussat 3 will be deployed by the end of
this year.
  The other 2 Aussat satellites were deployed by the US Space Shuttle program.
The decision to launch the third satellite with Arianespace was made before
the Challenger disaster in January.
  Farrell said it is not yet clear what implications the Ariane disaster
will have for satellite operators trying to obtain insurance.


	<h> Professional virtue </h>
	
Engineers are considered to be more honest and ethical than many other
professionals including accountants and lawyers and they also rate higher
than both state and federal members of parliament, according to a Morgan
Gallup Poll survey of professional virtue contained in a recent issue of
The Bulletin.
  56% of the people interviewed for the poll thought engineers had high
standards of ethics and honesty.
  Above engineers in the poll came dentists, the top scorer with 63%, doctors,
bank managers and school teachers. Police were on the same level as engineers.
  The 2 lowest scorers were union leaders with 5% and car salesmen with
3%.


	<h> Test drilling for proposed harbor tunnel </h>
	
Test drilling of Sydney Harbor's floor began this month to establish the 
best route for a road tunnel proposed as a second harbor crossing.
  The drilling, being carried out by Coffey &amp; Partners, is only one facet
of a $2 million feasibility study for the project.
  The Transfield Pty Ltd/Kumagai Gumi joint venture proposing the $350 million
tunnel has also engaged the services of other consulting engineers including:
‚2 Gutteridge Haskins &amp; Davey Pty Ltd, Maunsell &amp; Partners Pty Ltd and Parsons
Brinckerhoff of the US as a consortium to design the tunnel's mechanical,
electrical, ventilation, control, hydraulic and fire control facilities
‚2 Macdonald Wagner Pty Ltd, assisted by Freeman Fox &amp; Partners of Hong Kong,
to design the immersed-tube tunnel section
‚2 John Connell-Mott Hay &amp; Anderson to design the land tunnels.
  GHD is also carrying out land survey and traffic studies for the joint
venture.
  All the groups working on the project are being co-ordinated by Wargon
Chapman Partners Pty Ltd, the design manager.
  The NSW Government has appointed Pak-Poy &amp; Kneebone Pty Ltd to advise
it on the engineering aspects of the project.
  Lee Gibbon, formerly of Transfield's Queensland office, is project manager.
He has worked on the recently completed Gateway Bridge in Brisbane, 2 other
major bridges across the Brisbane River and on a 11 km, 880mm-diameter
submarine pipeline under Spencer Gulf.
  The joint venture is to complete the feasibility study and report to the
State Government by the end of this year.


	<h> Painting inspired 'city of tents' concept </h>
	
A travelling exhibition described as a journey through time and space
will hit the road in Australia for the full year in 1988.
  Designed to entertain, delight, celebrate and enjoy, it is an exhibition
that will be about attitudes, values, perceptions, myths and dreams.
  The Australian Bicentennial Exhibition will start in Albury/Wodonga on
Jan 1 1988. It will travel 30,000 km throughout Australia visiting 34 towns
and cities in all states and territories.
  Exhibits will include hands-on elements such as computers, interactive
games and computer-activated audiovisuals.
  The exhibition will be transported by a convoy of 20 pantechnicons pulled
by prime movers.
  At each location 6 pairs of pantechnicons will form display modules
concentrating on different themes. Each module will comprise 2 pantechnicons
linked by colorful fabric structures. There will be about 250m2 of exhibition
space in each module.
  The dominating feature of the exhibition is expected to be a 25m-high,
600-seat Bicentennial theatre. Other structures will include a specially
designed sound shell.
  The structure of the exhibition was designed by architect Daryl Jackson.
His concept was selected as the result of a competition conducted by the
Australian Bicentennial Authority in 1983.
  Jackson said: &quot;My ideas for the design were inspired in part by a Eugene
von Guerard painting depicting Ballarat as the tent city it was in the 1850s.&quot;
  The computer-aided design work for the exhibition's &quot;city of tents&quot; recently
won a prestigious award in the US against 40 finalists from 5 countries.
The Best CAD Application Award was made to Computer Plot Australia Pty Ltd
of Melbourne. It is the highest award made each year at the annual conference
of the Intergraph International Graphics Users' Group.
  Jackson used Computer Plot's Intergraph 780 CAD system as a design tool
to refine his original concept and to produce a series of line drawings
and colored photographs displaying transparency and shadow.
  Once he formed the idea for the &quot;city of tents&quot; the structural details
were added by engineer John Connell &amp; Associates.
  After this the drawings went to Computer Plot which generated 3D
full-color models on its CAD system.
  The models can be rotated and expanded and internal as well as external
views can be displayed. Computer Plot used the Intergraph sculptured surface
modelling and RSURF software packages in this work.
  The contract for 25 prime movers has been awarded to Kenworth Trucks,
while the order for the pantechnicons is expected to be announced soon by
the exhibition's project manager, the Federal Department of Housing and
Construction.
  The Federal Government is providing $19 million for the project and BHP
is providing a further $6 million. Other funds will be raised through the
activities of a bookshop, exhibition shop and food services.




	<h> Bureacratic red tape smothers development </h>
	

Community concerns about many major engineering developments in the past
have been largely responsible for the complex review procedures of government
agencies which now must be satisfied before development proposals can proceed.
Engineers accept that the environment must be protected and that the community
should be consulted about planned projects.
But the approval procedures cause so many uncertainties and delays, says 
John Hannan, that developers can lose confidence and seek opportunities 
elsewhere.
Hannan, who is manager, planning and environment, of the NSW Coal Association,
says in the Perspective article beginning on page 42 of this issue of Engineers
Australia that the commendable aim of protecting the environment seems to
have become lost in a plethora of bureacratic procedures.


	<h> RMIT to stay with Rockwell </h>
	
The Council of the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology has rejected
a move to end RMIT's association with a fellowship scheme run by the US
arms manufacturer Rockwell International.
  At its May meeting the Council voted not to accept a recommendation from
the academic board that the Institute sever its links with Rockwell which
each year gives 2 RMIT engineering graduates the chance to work in the US
for 12 months.
  The academic board's recommendation resulted from a motion put by Andrew
Dodd, president of the Student's Representative Council, who said RMIT
should not be the recruitment ground for a nuclear weapons manufacturer.


</sample>
