Roleystone District High School The Building Management Authority of WA  

The site chosen for the school is typical of the hills suburb of Roleystone.
It is steeply sloping, heavily wooded, and composed entirely of lateritic
rock. The planning of the school is based on the idea of a small town or
village, with the main street being curved to follow the site contour. This
enables better access to each building, with a minimum of stairways and
ramping. At this early stage there are gaps in the street frontage, but
as the school is developed, buildings will appear on the `vacant lots'.
  The focal point of the planning is the library forecourt and this space
serves also as the stage for the amphitheatre which has been formed in the
slope of the hillside, to the north of the library. The roof of the
amphitheatre (it is also the lunch shed) is formed of structural steel,
covered in corrugated zincalume with patent glazing skylights, the whole
forming a sort of half buried gazebo.
  All buildings are structural steel framed, with brick and glass cladding,
the roofing also being steel framed except for verandah rafters. Eaves and
barge details for the steel framed sections were designed using commercially
available zed purlins and cold formed channels. The system enabled rapid
erection and finishing off, the building contract being completed two weeks
ahead of schedule.
  Limited water supply and the rocky terrain precluded the provision of
the traditional suburban school landscaping. Also, the nature of the terrain
meant that the existing vegetation would be slow to regenerate once disturbed.
Because of these factors, maximum effort was made to preserve the natural
landscape. This part of the design philosophy was actively supported by
the builder who took great care in minimising damage to the environment
by construction equipment and vehicles.
  In line with government policy on energy conservation in Western Australia,
all classrooms are designed to take maximum advantage of natural lighting
and ventilation.
  The total cost of the project was $3,372,385 (1983). Included in this
was the cost of excavating four and a half metres into the ironstone hillside
to create a football oval. After adjustment for location and difficult site
conditions, the cost per square metre of building compared favourably with
the national average for schools of its type.

