Managing manganese deficiency  

Manganese deficiencies in cereal crops are becoming more common. Recent
research has determined how much manganese a crop needs and produced ways
of determining whether that need has been met. More information on the best
cultivars for manganese-deficient areas and on the general management of
manganese deficiency is now available.

Manganese, an essential micronutrient involved in the early light-harvesting
steps of photosynthesis as well as many other enzyme-mediated reactions
within plants, has an equally complex role within the soil microbial
population. Acting on the soil manganese pool, reducing microbes create
more soluble forms, which then become available for plant growth. Competing
with these groups are oxidizing microbes that synthesize insoluble manganese
compounds and, if conditions are right, their activities can lead to manganese
deficiency in crops grown on those soils.
  Defining the precise conditions leading to manganese deficiency is difficult.
However, the more alkaline soils - such as the calcareous ones dominated
by limestone - favour the oxidized forms of manganese and have a low natural
availability of the element.
  The seasonal wetting and drying cycle that the soil experiences also
influences availability: saturation of the soil leads to low oxygen levels
that favour the activity of the reducing microbes; conversely, as the soil
drains, the oxidizing microbes are favoured and manganese levels decline.
As the soil approaches an air-dry state the oxidizing microbes cannot continue
operating, but chemical reactions in the soil slowly release manganese,
which is then available to the plants when the soil is re-wetted.
  Manganese deficiency also occurs in the seedling phase of cereals grown
in southern Australia. This is most pronounced when the start of the growing
season is cold and unusually wet. Under these conditions root activity and
elongation are slow and the volume of soil that is exploited is relatively
small.

