Buying machinery - new or used?  

Few hobby farmers can afford all the machines they would like to make life
on the farm easier. But once you decide a piece of equipment has become
a necessity rather than a luxury, should you lash out on a new model or
seek one secondhand? Bill Finlayson has some handy tips on the topic. They
could also help you avoid buying a `lemon'.

  New machinery can appear very attractive. It comes bright and shiny, no
one else has had the chance to abuse it and you should be able to have a
long and trouble free life from it. It comes with perhaps 12 months warranty
and spare parts should be easy to obtain.
  It's going to cost more than a secondhand one of the same model but may
be worth it. If you are not handy with tools and mechanical repairs or you
have only limited time to spend, then new machines could be a wise choice.
  If the machine is an essential part of a cropping program or major farm
enterprise then it may be best to consider buying it new.
  Let us take, for example, the tractor. Across the full range of power
specifications there are more than 400 makes and models from which to choose
and with the current slump in machinery sales it is possible to bargain
for the best possible price.
  Generally, it's best to buy from your local dealer as a warranty usually
requires the machine to be delivered back to the dealer.
  In some cases the dealer will send a mechanic to the property without
a service charge if you live fairly close. If not, you may have to pay a
mileage fee and travelling time for the mechanic. For major repairs, say
to a tractor, you will have to pay the transport cost to the dealer.
  Try to avoid unknown or little known brands, especially with imported
equipment, until you are sure adequate parts and service are available. Many
machines are imported to `test the market'. If they prove unsuccessful then
they simply disappear from sale and it is almost impossible to obtain parts
unless you import them yourself.
  If a particular little known brand appeals to you then go to the importer
and have a look for yourself and see the size of the operation and what
their stock of parts is like. This may mean that you will have to delay
the purchase until you go to the city, but it could save you many thousands
of dollars at a later date. Delays of some months on some parts are not
unknown. This can be disastrous at a critical time in a cropping program.
  Look for the well established brands that you know have good stocks of
parts in Australia and adequate back-up service. This does not mean that
lesser known brands are of inferior quality. It simply means that if there
are only a few of a particular brand of machine sold you may have difficulties
and delays in having it repaired after some years of use. 

 Used machinery  

  The main reason for buying used machinery is to save on capital outlay,
especially when the farm's size means there will only be occasional, light
use of the machine.
  In making this decision you must bear in mind the degree of reliability
required for the particular machine.
  Again, the question comes up "What brand should I buy?" The same principles
apply as with selecting a new model, only greater care has to be taken.
  There are currently several thousand makes and models of non-current tractors
being used in Australia. Many of these no longer have any trade representation
and spare parts are only available through wreckers. With some of the lesser
known ones it is impossible to repair them if anything major goes wrong.
Look into the parts and service situation very carefully and leave no stone
unturned to assure yourself that the used machine you want to buy can be
kept operational.

 Where to buy used machines  

  There are three main sources of supply which are given in the order of
preference.
‚2 the local machinery dealer;
‚2 private sale (through neighbours or newspaper advertisements);
‚2 auction sales (farm clearing sales, repossession, ex-government equipment,
disposals etc.)
  Don't let local friendships with dealers or neighbours influence your
decision on a purchase. If you buy a bomb, it could result in much
unpleasantness and broken friendships. Select in a businesslike way and
be prepared to accept the consequences of your decision.
  A well established and respected dealership or agency has a reputation
to live up to. To protect that reputation they should do necessary repair
work before offering a machine for sale. If you have a genuine complaint
after purchase you are more likely to get help from the dealer either free
or at a discounted rate.
  Private sales do have a greater element of risk if you don't know the
vendor or the real reason for his selling the equipment. A few hours spent
in conversation in the local hotels and clubs can often bring to light a
lot of useful information to help you in deciding on the purchase,
particularly when buying used tractors.
  Auction sales present the greatest risk. If they are held a long way from
your home you may have little chance of a thorough inspection or testing
of the tractor concerned. Reduce this risk by making some investigations
well before the sale day. There are bargains to be had at clearing sales
if you know the equipment and something about the reasons for the sale.
  At times equipment other than that belonging to the immediate property
is sold at clearing sales for a variety of reasons so check out the ownership
of each item of interest to you, particularly tractors.
 
 What size?  

  A machine that is too big for the work in hand is a bad investment even
at a bargain price. Work out the size of equipment needed based on the time
available to do the work with it and the power that you have to drive it.
  If you are matching tractor and implement you should aim to use
about 75% of the maximum engine power in the appropriate gear to give the
correct operating speed for the implement. This may not be possible for
all implements but at the least it should be aimed at for the major cultivation
equipment of other major plant in regular use.

 Cost  

  There are no hard and fast rules about prices for used machines. Beware
if it seems to be too cheap. Check out prices with other dealers and in
newspaper advertisements. Don't be in a hurry to buy.
  Work out an average price for a particular model and be prepared to vary
that price up or down depending upon the condition of the one being considered.
Set a reasonable upper limit and then arrange the upper limit with the lending
body, if necessary. Don't let them talk you into a higher borrowing limit.
  Currently it's a buyer's market for secondhand tractors so don't give
the impression of being over anxious to make a purchase. You will be surprised
how the price can drop over a few weeks particularly if you don't have a
trade-in. Use the waiting time to point out any faults you may have noticed.
A positive prospective sale is a good inducement to rectify faults.

 Inspecting the equipment  

  This is the most important part of the whole purchasing procedure. You
may be making a major purchase so it's important to make a thorough job
of it.
  If you inspect a number of machines don't rely on memory, make notes as
you go and start with a list of things to be checked.
  If you are inspecting tractors or engine functioned machines never start
them without the approval of the owner. Preferably get him to start it for
you the first time. If you start it you could be blamed for the pre-existing
problems.
  Don't be afraid to ask for a demonstration on your property. This gives
an additional opportunity to check for faults in used equipment and to ensure
that either new or used gear will match and meet your requirements.
  If you don't feel competent or confident enough to inspect the machine,
find expert help. In the major centres there is usually someone who is
competent and willing to make such inspections for a fee and even give
a written report. If so, check out his reputation or qualifications before
you hire him.
  You are making a major purchase so be prepared to pay a reasonable fee.
Such people could expect to be paid $50 to $80 an hour, or you could agree
on a flat rate of $100 for a small tractor to around $500 for a big one.
  
  Warranty  

  Most new machines have some warranty. Be honest about claims and don't ask
for it when the equipment has been damaged through misuse. Don't be afraid
to ask for some warranty when buying used equipment. Many reputable dealers
do considerable rebuilding work on their used equipment and give warranty.
If they are not prepared to then perhaps you should look a little closer
at what you are buying. 

 Safety  

  If you are buying an agricultural tractor of any age weighing between
560 and 3860kg, it must be fitted with a roll over protective structure
(ROPS). It cannot legally be sold without this fitted. Machines must also
be fitted with PTO guards, and gears, belts, pulleys, chains, sprockets etc
must be guarded. Don't let the salesman fob you off with the excuse that
you can't buy ROPS or guards. If you buy it and use it without you could
be prosecuted.
  There are considerable savings to be made by searching for the right used
machines. Inspect it carefully and get a second or third opinion if necessary.
Don't be in a hurry to buy. Have a good look around and let your needs to
be known to local dealers and neighbours. The right equipment will soon
come up.
  Be careful even with new machinery. Be sure that you understand exactly
what the specification means. Check out on tractors such things as engine 
HP, PTO HP and drawbar HP so that you don't buy the wrong size.
  If you have a problem with new machines go back to the dealer until it's
fixed. If he won't fix it then raise the matter with the distributor until
you get satisfaction.

