Kids on the local council By Elizabeth Adlam In more than 50 towns and municipalities around Australia, young people
are being successfully initiated in community involvement and responsibility  

  Proudly wearing his shining chain of office, Brett Chant, junior mayor
of Shepparton, Victoria, takes his seat on the raised dais in the town's
crowded council chambers, beneath the official photograph of a young Queen
Elizabeth. Beside him, the junior town clerk and junior city engineer look
down at the horseshoe-shaped conference table where 21 boys and girls ,
smartly dressed in their school uniforms, sort through their papers a little
self-consciously. At the press desk at one side sits a reporter from the
local paper; from the opposite wall, portraits of the town's ex-mayors and
town clerks watch over the proceedings. As the doors close, everyone stands
for the opening prayer. The October 1985 meeting of the Shepparton Junior
Council has begun.
  A prosperous rural town in northern Victoria with 27,000 inhabitants,
46 per cent of them under 25, and 4500 between 10 and 20, Shepparton is
typical of the more than 50 Australian local-government areas that have
established junior councils. Its youthful councillors have launched a wide
range of programs over the years; thanks to them, the town now has a network
of Safety Houses, identified by letter-box stickers, where children being
harassed or followed can seek help on the way to or from school, and a
maze will soon be built in a town park. Junior councillors have persuaded
authorities to improve several dangerous town intersections and mounted
a campaign to reduce vandalism in local schools. Recently, moving into more
serious political areas, they proposed that Shepparton be declared a
nuclear-free zone, and complained about the short notice given to ratepayers
when the town's water supply was fluoridated.
  Last year, on Shepparton's suggestion, more than 150 members from 10
of Victoria's 40 junior councils met at Altona for an inaugural state
conference. Discussion ranged from the need for drop-in centres for homeless
young people to the inadequacy of public transport in country towns. "The
conference showed us that our problems were not unique," says Brett Chant,
"and we learned how other communities had dealt with them."
  The junior council was the brainchild of Alex Rigg, mayor of Shepparton
fom 1965 to 1968. Rigg believed that such a council could give the town's
teenagers invaluable training in the realities of government and
administration, interest them in local affairs, and instil a sense of civic
pride. With the help of local schoolteachers, Rigg established the council
in 1968, and its success and community standing have grown ever since.
  Each February, Shepparton's high-school students and teachers choose a
junior council consisting of two Year-9 and two Year-10 students from each
of the town's six secondary schools. The councillors then choose from among
themselves  a junior mayor, a junior town clerk and a junior city engineer.
Each school and its representatives are allocated one portfolio: public
services, finance and administration, health, community amenities, planning
and development, or recreation and culture. Throughout the year, the school
and its representatives, supervised by a teacher, will be responsible for
all junior-council projects and proposals within the relevant portfolio.
  Going it alone. Being a junior councillor has many benefits beyond the
obvious "perks" such as invitations to attend important functions and gala
occasions. Brett Chant claims that his term as junior mayor improved his
self-confidence greatly. "It is so good to have one's views taken seriously,"
he says. Juanita Grevill - a junior councillor in 1980 and now working as
a reporter with The Shepparton News - believes that the experience she gained
in public speaking and dealing with people has helped her journalistic career.
Adds town clerk Ivan Gilbert, "The junior council can also encourage young
people to make careers in local government - one of our former junior
councillors is training to be a city engineer."
  Meetings are held monthly, following the exact meeting procedure of the
city council, with the junior mayor presiding. Two adult council members
attend each session to give advice or guidance. Junior-council coordinator
Joanne Church, 27, also attends. "I am there to help the kids," she says,
"but usually they choose to go it alone." Most junior-council motions result
in one of the schools writing to a relevant body for information or action.
Most people are happy to cooperate, and indeed the junior council has won
so much respect that organisations such as the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
and the Foster Parents' Plan of Australia have approached it directly to
ensure publicity among schoolchildren.
  Although most adults welcome what they consider to be reasonable proposals,
such as setting up a competition to design a sticker promoting the 1986
International Year of Peace, some say the young councillors are too
idealistic. "They sometimes leap up and demand action without first
considering the possible difficulties and how to overcome them," says Ivan
Gilbert.
  On the other hand, the junior council sometimes draws attention to a problem
that adults might never see, such as overcrowding on school buses. Gilbert
agrees that junior council "is an invaluable way of discovering what things
look like from young people's viewpoint."
  Shepparton's schools take turns to prepare junior-council agendas. "The
whole school gets involved," says Goulburn Valley Grammar School's coordinator
Beverley Manson. "Many students not on the council ask for the agenda, discuss
items and, afterwards, want to know what happened."
  Although all their council meetings are public, the young officials
soon forget the presence of adult councillors, coordinators and visitors,
and speak openly. "Sometimes they seem to be competing to see who can move
the most motions," says Wayne Johnston, Shepparton South Technical School's
coordinator. "But during their term as councillors, they overcome their
enthusiasm to speak their piece at all costs, and learn to listen and think
before talking."
  Says Gilbert, "By working as junior councillors, they learn to make properly
supported submissions and to recognise what course to follow to get action."
  They learn also to curb their youthful impatience. Says Brett Chant, "At
first, I got frustrated by delays in getting things done, but now I understand
the reasons. I've learned too that persistence generally pays off!"
  At the meeting I attended, junior councillors debated a report, presented
by Olivia Clarke of Goulburn Valley Grammar School, on the dangers of children
riding bicycles on footpaths. "Several people have been knocked down by
cyclists," she said. "It isn't fair."
  "Cyclists should stay on the roads, where they belong," agreed her schoolmate
Stuart Gowty.
  Andrew Mulcahy of Shepparton High School disagreed emphatically. "If cyclists
ride on the roads, then they are knocked down by motorists! It is much safer
if they ride on the footpaths."
  A fierce debate ensued on what penalties, if any, should be enforced for
riding on the pavement. Suggestions ranged from hefty fines to letting
down offenders' tyres.
  "Penalties aren't the answer," said Kim Crowley of Wanganui Park High.
"We need a public-education program to make motorists more aware of cyclists
on the road."
  At this point, the junior mayor showed his talent as chairman, taking
control just when things might have got out of hand. "Well, here we have
two points of view," he said, and neatly summed up both sides. At Brett
Chant's suggestion, the council agreed to invite a police officer to the
next meeting to give the official view.
  After the meeting had closed, I spoke to Shepparton's mayor, John Weir.
"Young people are full of ideas," he told me, "but they don't find it easy
to get them through to the older generation. Often, their views are casually
presented, in fragments, to parents over the tea-table or to teachers at
school. The junior council provides a unique forum where kids can think
their ideas through, express them effectively - and know they'll be listened
to. No community should be without one."

