<subsample>
	<id> F03b </id>
	


	<source> Readers Digest - September 1986 </source>
	


	<h> A rainforest journey </h>
	


	<bl> By Margaret Hotson </bl>
	


	<misc> Evolving undisturbed for millions of years, Queensland's tropical wonderlands
are a trove of natural treasures worth protecting </misc>
	

  THE TROPICAL rainforest is a cathedral. Its trees form pillars that soar
into the sky. The leaves create a canopy like stained-glass windows. The
ground is a tapestry of a thousand shades of green, dim in most places
because the tree-tops block out the sun.
  Some 7800 square kilometres of such forest lie in scattered fragments
along Queensland's coast between Ingham and Cooktown. They contain some
of the oldest undisturbed ecological systems on earth - formed more than
100 million years ago, when the great reptiles ruled the globe. Over 50
national parks protect about one-seventh of this area, providing unique
holiday camps for nature lovers. Last summer, I joined the growing number
of tourists who arrive here to bushwalk, birdwatch, spotlight for nocturnal
mammals, raft the rivers and swim in crystal pools beneath waterfalls.
  On the first evening of my visit, I went with two biologists, David Thomae
and his wife Kerstin, to spotlight possums in the Mount Hypipamee National
Park on the Atherton Tableland. More species of marsupials live in this
3.6-square-kilometre stand of rainforest than in any other area of comparable
size in the world.
  As the sun set, David identified the birds whose songs filled the clearing
where we sat. &quot;Emerald dove ... eastern whipbird ... spotted catbird ...
Lewin's honeyeater ....&quot; A large black brush turkey emerged from the forest
and stretched out its red head, yellow wattle dangling, to peer at us, then 
scurried off. &quot;Grey-headed robin ... crimson rosella ...&quot; David continued.
Queensland's tropical rainforests, though covering just one-thousandth of
our land area, are home to almost one-fifth of our bird species.
  Darkness closed in. The birds fell silent and a chorus of crickets took
over to a background of frog mating-calls. Kerstin swept the spotlight over
the trees. &quot;There's a green ringtail,&quot; she whispered. Gazing along the beam
of light, I saw two brilliant orange pinpoints - its eyes - and made out
the shadowy form of the possum's body. Then I saw the glint of a second
pair of eyes - the young on its mother's back. Both remained stock-still
while the light was on them, but disappeared behind the cover of branches
and leaves as soon as it was swung away. &quot;The animals don't seem to mind
the light,&quot; said Kerstin, &quot;and by mesmerising them, it allows us to get
much closer than would be possible otherwise.&quot;
  Later, we spotted a coppery brushtail possum, a dark brown and white
Herbert River ringtail and a pair of lemur-like  ringtails with rich
chocolate-brown coats and fawn bellies. Our evening's climax, however,
was finding a baby green ringtail on a low branch by the road. It stared at
us balefully, clasping a half-eaten leaf, so close that I could count every
whisker on its delicate pink nose.
  My next expedition was to a waterfall hidden in the rainforest behind
the little sugar-producing town of Mossman. Local guide Sue Goadby led me
past pandanus and tall, parasol-like fan palms into the heart of the forest.
After an hour's climb in extreme humidity, it was a relief to head down
a gully towards the waterfall. Across our path lay a fallen rainforest
giant, its trunk covered in orchids, bird's nest ferns, staghorns and lichens.
Bright orange fungi already sprouted from its damp underside, beginning
to break down the dead plant and return its nutrients to the soil. Across
the gully, the snaking roots of a strangler fig spread their fatal embrace
round another liane-draped tree.
  We scrambled down to the waterfall, where shafts of bright sunlight pierced
the forest canopy. Around us, beautiful forest ferns grew thickly, and overhead
danced a blue Ulysses butterfly, 10 centimetres from wingtip to wingtip. Film
star Diane Cilento, who owns and protects the land below this waterfall,
says, &quot;People who view the forest from the roadside have no idea how full
of life it is.&quot;
  My next stop was at Cape Tribulation, in the Greater Daintree region.
This area boasts one of the world's most remarkable concentrations of
primitive angiosperms, or flowering plants.


</subsample>
