Education Schoolchildren fodder in a feminist war By Geoffrey Partington  

FEW CLAIMS are heard more often about Australian education than that it
systematically disadvantages girls and women. People paid high salaries
for running school systems shout the bad news from the rooftops, although
they never offer to resign. John Steinle, for example, Director-General
of Education in South Australia recently wrote in a booklet distributed
by the tens of thousands: "The department recognises that particular groups
are disadvantaged by our present education system. The largest of these
groups is girls." But the cry of unfair discrimination is most often bruited
from the serried ranks of women's advisers, equal opportunity officers
and various other shes who must be obeyed. How true are their accusations?
  Even the more ardent feminists do not claim that there is overt
discrimination against girls in schools. Boys and girls are subject to
the same attendance laws and the amount of money spent on schooling is little
affected, if at all, by gender. On the whole, being more docile and sociable,
girls take to school more readily than boys, are quicker to master skills
prized in schools - being in particular notably neater and better co-ordinated
on average - and gain higher average levels of achievement in primary schools.
Most primary teachers, especially in the junior grades, are women so that
suitable "role models", to use the trendy phrase, are more abundant for
girls than for boys.
  Curricula have not been highly differentiated by gender in the past,
but until very recently feminists latched on to every form of differentiation
as evidence of unfair discrimination against girls. The biggest feminist
hate until as recently as 1980 was single-sex schools because, as English
feminist Madeleine Arnot put it, "the dominant form of reproduction of
bourgeois gender relations (until recently when it has been modified) has
been that of single-sex schools" and "the use of single-sex schooling has
been the major form of reproduction of gender relations - relations that
constituted the bourgeois ideal of the family form of male hierarchy and
female dependency and subordination". Bourgeois ideals are, of course, known
by feminists (nearly all highly bourgeois themselves), to be very wicked
indeed.
  For nearly 20 years Australian governments have been following feminist
advice to abolish single-sex schools and to make the curriculum of boys
and girls identical in mixed schools. In high schools there was an assault
on woodwork and metalwork for boys as against cookery and needlework for
girls; in the junior primary schools, boys were encouraged to play more
in the Wendy House and girls to engage in more boisterous pursuits (no pretend
guns though, please). Child-centred feminist teachers found their underwear
in a constant twist because they believed with one part of their minds in
letting children follow their own interests, but with the other they felt
it necessary to prevent children, also victims of our disgusting bourgeois
society, from choosing "traditionally sex-related" interests.
  On the playing fields the cry is still for identity of treatment. Federal
Education Minister Susan Ryan, the Commonwealth Schools Commission's
Commissar for Girls, Eileen Duhs, and an army of female jocks continue to
demand uniformity in sport. In South Australia in 1986 Equal Opportunities
Commissar Josephine Tiddy has succeeded in producing an outstanding feminist
blueprint for equality: schoolgirls must be permitted to participate in
traditionally boys-only sports, but boys will be banned from messing up
traditionally girls-only sports. Sex differences in sport, so many feminists
believe, are merely "socially-constructed" and not based on real, objective
differences in average height, weight, speed or aggressiveness.
  Just as victory seemed nigh in the feminist fight against single-sex schools
and against sex-based differentiations in mixed schools, along came Dale 
Spender and a new wave of feminists. Spender is a luminary in the London 
University Institute of Education, but she and her equally militant sister 
Lynn, still in Australia, are female scions of the famous Spender family of 
which Sir Percy was merely one of the most prominent in the Australian upper 
crust. Dale Spender's great contribution to the gender debate is the claim 
that in mixed classrooms teachers, women just as much as men, unfairly 
discriminate against girls by concentrating more on the boys. In so far as 
this claim is really true, it relates only to the tendency for boys to 
misbehave more than girls and for teachers therefore to spend more time on 
correcting and censuring the boys. This does not seem to be evidence for 
unfair discrimination, but Spender's disciples repeat the claim with 
enthusiasm. Judith Whyte, a science educator, writes that "boys initiate more 
contacts with teachers, are more successful in gaining teacher time and 
attention and are perceived by teachers to be more rewarding and reponsible 
pupils". Whyte fears, too, that "the possibilities for equalising male and 
female participation are very limited". Another science educator, Jan Harding, 
told South Australian feminist teachers last month that giving more time and 
attention in mixed classes to girls is no good either, because "what often 
happens is that teachers instinctively go and help girls in science and 
technology classes and in doing so often confirm their helplessness".
  Feminists often try to have it both ways. Until the late 1970s a larger
proportion of boys than of girls stayed on at school after the age of 15.
Feminists cited that as evidence of "unequal participation of girls in
education". In recent years a larger proportion of girls than boys have
stayed on at school after 15. Feminists hold this proves "the unequal
participation of girls in the work force". Similarly feminists allege unfair
discrimination because girls, if given the choice, opt for mathematics and
physical sciences less frequently than do boys but, despite lip service to
bilingualism, no feminist claims that the smaller proportion of boys choosing
a foreign language to an advanced level shows unfair discrimination against
them. Heads the feminists win, tails they sure don't lose.
  It is strange that feminists, despite frequent rhetoric about the uniqueness
or even the superiority of women's insights, invariably regard patterns
of choice by women as worse than those made by men. Traditional areas of
women's work are automatically denigrated by feminists yet they claim
that non-traditional areas in which women come to predominate, as with medicine
in the Soviet Union, are only conceded because they are trivial and
unimportant. As Marx (Groucho) put it: "If it's a club that will let me
join it, it's not worth joining". It's what the American anti-feminist Midge
Decter calls the "shit-work" thesis: whatever women do in larger numbers
than men is defined by feminists as low in worth.
  For Australian politicians the immediate problem is that, after reducing
and well nigh abolishing single-sex education in every government school
system in the commonwealth in response to feminist demands, they must now
go back over the course and separate the boys from the girls again, at
the behest of new feminist demands. For feminists the problem is that bourgeois
ideals are generated both by single-sex and by co-educational schools. The
Partington 1986 Award, of too handsome a value, will be presented to the
feminist theoretician who finds a third way, so that we can both avoid having
the girls together with the boys, or separate from them.

