By Phyllis Gibbs Chapter 3 The School  

The school was a wooden building - less primitive than my boarding place,
but nonetheless a very basic structure. I was rather shattered to discover
that I had thirty-six children on the roll; this was very large for a
one-teacher school. They ranged in age from five to fifteen years, and from
Kindergarten to Second Year High School. There was definitely not seating
accommodation for thirty-six pupils in the classroom and so, in fine weather,
Kindergarten children sat on mats on the verandah. This made teaching
extremely difficult, for discipline was a problem.
  The previous teacher had left me no information about the ability of any
of the children, and she obviously had not given the High School Entrance
Examination, with the result that I didn't even know if any children were
entitled to commence High School work that year.
  On my first morning, I decided to try and gain some idea of the standard
of work of the children to enable me to place them in classes. Arriving
at school early, I put graded sums on the blackboard. After our formal
introduction, greetings and a friendly chat, I said, "I want you to start
on the sums on the board and go as far as you can." Immediately a hefty
lad, aged about fifteen, stood up and yelled, "We don't do sums at this
time in the morning!" I explained that I was the one who decided what subjects
they did, and when. "Today," I announced firmly, "it is arithmetic - right
now." There followed a most unpleasant argument, but it was one I had to
win, and eventually I was at my wit's end. What form of punishment could
I employ? This great lout was taller than I and seemingly quite fearless.
Grabbing the cane, which I had seen in the drawer, I advanced threatingly
towards him. This fortunately had the desired effect. I don't know who was
the most startled - the boy or the other pupils - but I do know who was
the most scared. Had I known what I learnt a few days later, I would have
been even more frightened. The previous year, this same boy used to grab
the teacher, bundle her outside, barricade the door, and then the pupils
had a merry time.
  Luckily for me, my bluff worked and we did the subjects I chose. However,
as time progressed, discipline became almost impossible. The two ringleaders
were utterly incorrigible. They were past the legal school leaving age
and had absolutely no desire to learn, but by coming to school avoided working
at home on the farm. It would have helped considerably had I been able to
discuss the possibility of expelling them, with my Headmaster friend or
the Inspector, but how could this be done on a party line? Finally it became
too much for me and I did expel them. I wrote to the Inspector, telling
him of my action. He wrote back, saying the step I had taken was a very
drastic one and he would visit me as soon as possible. I called on both
sets of parents. One family was extremely rude, but the other informed me
that their son had been expelled from a number of boarding schools, including
one in Sydney, so it was no wonder I had problems with him.
  But now the trouble really began. The school settled down to work, but
every day the two expelled pupils pulled up outside on horseback, screaming
obscenities. Of course, once again, had I been more experienced, I would
have written to the policeman in the nearest town.
  There were no panes of glass in the windows, and no locks on any cupboards
or drawers. I decided to remedy this. My landlord agreed to purchase the
necessary requirements in town for me and then lend me the appropriate tools.
Any hope that he would offer to assist me was dashed, when he presented
me with the tools and proceeded to explain their usage. The following Saturday
I spent the whole day at school, in an effort to make it secure. The picture
of my putting in panes of glass, using the handle of a spoon to get the
putty in smoothly, must have been an amusing sight. Finally I went home
well satisfied. Imagine my dismay, when I arrived at school on Monday morning,
to see all panes of glass piled up on the top step and all the locks beside
them. There was no doubt this was the work of my two tormentors.
  The weather was extremely hot in February and as there wasn't a 
single tree in the school playground I decided to try and procure some to 
plant. These were available in the nearest town and Wally collected them for 
me; so another Saturday was spent planting trees. Alas, these shared the same
fate as the panes of glass. It was disheartening to say the least.
  Things quietened down for a week or two. However, I was concerned by the
fact that many pupils came to school quite late and absenteeism was rife.
As pupils never brought notes to explain this, I decided to visit the parents
and find out the reasons. Some of the children lived miles from school and
rode in each day. (We had a small yard for the horses.) How was I to reach
these farms? The crossbred draught horse seemed to be the only answer -
not the most comfortable horse to ride, but he got me there. The parents
mostly resented my coming. They said the children were needed to help with
the milking, because they couldn't afford to pay for labour. There was very
little I could do except appeal to them.
  By this time the weather had cooled down slightly, and as the school looked
so bare and unkempt I suggested to the children that we grow some plants.
Perhaps if they did the gardening, the two terrors may not destroy their
labours, but alas, that was wishful thinking. The pupils were excited and
worked enthusiastically, digging and planting, but on Monday we arrived
at school to find all the plants dead on the doorstep. The situation was
becoming quite desperate.
 The following week brought an even more disturbing incident. Walking across
the paddocks one morning, I was confronted by several girl pupils screaming
hysterically. A large black red-bellied snake was coiled up on the seat
of the girls' lavatory. Whatever was I to do? As a city girl, I was terrified
of snakes and the very thought of trying to kill one - especially shut up
with it in a confined space - appalled me. One glimpse of the reptile was
enough to convince me that I should wait until one of the older boys came
to school. There was one particularly nice lad, who was anxious to learn
and who helped me wherever possible. Arming himself with a suitable weapon,
he went off to kill the offender, but arrived back a few minutes later,
laughing uproariously - the snake was already dead! To me it was no laughing
matter and I could not help wondering what would happen next.
  About this time the rainy season set in, and within a few days the river
came down and the creek flooded - making crossing over the log impossible.
For a few days I rode to school on the `all-purpose' horse, but then the
current became too strong too for that. Nothing daunted, I decided to swim
across, with my clothes in a waterproof pack strapped to my shoulders. As
the creek was well out of sight of any farmhouse, I was able to dress on
the other side. Swimming a flooded creek is no pleasant experience, as a
great collection of rubbish is swept down and had to be dodged, so I was
very pleased on the Friday, when the water level began to drop and the log
became visible. By the following Monday it would be possible to try crossing
that way again. Normally, because I was unable to lock up the school building
or anything in it, I had to carry all school records back and forth with
me each day. I wasn't prepared to risk anything that first morning - I'd
be lucky to get myself safely across. With no handrail, and only a long
stick with which to balance myself, crossing the log at any time was hazardous.
  As the water level was still quite high, I was feeling somewhat apprehensive
about the crossing, and when I reached the creek I stood for a few moments,
plucking up courage to start. Suddenly I realised someone was calling me.
Turning, I saw the father of one of my pupils beckoning to me from behind
a clump of bushes. Completely perplexed, and somewhat alarmed by this unusual
behaviour, I decided reluctantly to go over and confront him. The man was
very embarrassed, but finally explained, "I've often thought the tricks
those two boys played on you were quite funny, but I don't think what they 
have done this morning is funny. Actually, it could be very dangerous." He 
then informed me that a thin wire had been attached around the centre of the 
log, with the idea that it would trip me and I'd be thrown into the swirling 
water. "So I've come to warn you," continued my would-be-rescuer, "but for 
God's sake don't ever tell anyone who told you." Thanking him gratefully, I 
promised to keep quiet as to why I had changed plans and returned home.
  For me, undoubtedly, this was the climax and I was not prepared to tolerate
further trouble. I sat down immediately and wrote to the Inspector, telling
him that I could not remain at that school any longer, unless something
were done to improve the situation. I also stated that I was not prepared
to return to school until my landlord had cleared the log, and the flood
waters were lower and less frightening. At the same time I wrote and reported
the incident to the policeman in the town twenty miles away.
  The following week, the Priest arrived from town to conduct Mass at one
of the farmhouses, with the result that all the pupils, except my landlord's
two children, stayed away from school to attend Mass.
  The school was on the main road, but the only motor vehicles to ever
pass by belonged to the butcher and the baker, who called once a week. I
was therefore amazed to hear a car coming up the road that morning , as
it wasn't the day for either tradesman. I was simply horrified when the
car pulled up at the school and a very portly gentleman climbed through
the fence. (We had no gate.) He reached the door, introduced himself as
the School Inspector and then looked in astonishment at the empty classroom.
"The children are all at Mass," I hastened to explain. "The teacher isn't
at Mass?" he queried. I informed him that I was not a Catholic and even I were, I would be at school on a school day. Really, it was fortunate
the children were absent because it enabled me to relate to him the whole
story from the day I'd arrived. He was most upset about the refusal of the
locals to board me and said he would certainly tell the Priest the story.
My action in expelling the two troublemakers fortunately received his support.
He explained that for the past two or three years the school had been going
through a difficult period, but little did he realise just how difficult
that period had been. What I knew - and he didn't - was that the previous
teacher frequently went to town with the butcher on Thursday afternoon
and returned with the baker at lunchtime on Monday. None of the locals ever
reported her, as they were only too glad to have their children at home
to help on the farm.

