<sample>
	<id> F24 </id>
	


	<source> Drought or Deluge: Man in the Cooper's Creek Region - 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2038 words </note>
	


	<h> Cultures in conflict </h>
	

Charles Sturt, the first European to see the tribesmen of the Cooper, found
them an attractive people: `The men of this tribe were, without exception,
the finest I had seen on the Australian continent ... a well-made race.'
This opinion was repeated by both Alfred Howitt and John McKinlay of the
Burke and Wills relief expeditions, who commented favourably on their physical
appearance, apparent health and physical prowess, Sturt also admired their
temperament, commenting that they were in his opinion `naturally a mild
and inoffensive people', although remarkably brave when faced with exotic
beasts and strange men. Wills however thought them `easily frightened, and,
although fine-looking men, decidedly not of warlike disposition ... They appear
to be meanspirited and contemptible in every respect'. However, returned
from the journey to the Gulf, starving and ill, Wills could refer to them
as `our friends the blacks', and gratefully accept the shelter, food and
friendship they offered. Howitt rewarded the Cooper people for their kindness
to King and left the Cooper confident that he had ensured a friendly reception
for any future white travellers in the region.
  As inhabitants of an environment possessing resources adequate for their
own use but rarely allowing abundance over a long period, the Aborigines
had shown themselves willing to extend limited hospitality to small parties
of strangers passing through their country. Settlers, however, building
huts on the best campsites and herding cattle over their hunting range,
were recognized as intruders who threatened the finely balanced existence
of the local people. Once the initial awe abated and the white man was seen
to be a vulnerable human being, attempts were made to eject him.
  There was only one organized attempt to resist the alienation of the Cooper
tribal territories. In April 1867 the Sub-Protector of Aborigines in the
Far North, John Buttfield, reported to the South Australian Aborigines'
Office:
  
  I have the honor to inform you that having accompanied Sergeant
  Wauchop and eight Troopers to Lake Hope, Kopperamana, Killalpaninna and
  Lake Gregory I am now on my way south to Headquarters. The Natives that had
  collected in large numbers at Perigundi, including the Deerea [Dieri],
  Koonaree, Ominee [Ngameni] Yarrawarraka [Yauraworka], Cuddibirie,
  Yandrawandra [Yantruwanta] and Pilladappa tribes have dispersed. It appeared
  from information I gathered that an unusually large concourse assembled
  at Perigundi - had a very grand Corroboree in the month of March and then
  there devised a plan for exterminating the whole of the Settlers as far
  south as Blanchewater. It was their intention to murder the Missionaries
  first of all. The timely and unexpected arrival of three Police Troopers
  from Lake Hope prevented the execution of their diabolical intention.

  Anthropologists have suggested that sorcery was possibly the means intended
to be used to expel the settlers, but in fact the Mission Station was in
a state of physical siege by the end of march. The list of tribes given
by Buttfield suggests that the people who had seen most of the white man
on the Cooper - those in the Innamincka region - recognized him as a threat
to their lands and lent at least moral support to the resistance movement.
  Individuals met with local resistance to their settlement along the river.
John Conrick, left alone at Goonbabinna for two months, was aware that he
was in some danger and slept armed, with his dogs guarding the door of his
hut. The Cooper people watched from a distance as he weeded and watered
his vegetable garden, milked his cows, and rode with his dogs among the
cattle. As the days went by and no other white man appeared, they resolved
to rid themselves of the intruder.
  One morning, just before first light, about two hundred of the Wongkumara
people surrounded the hut. Conrick wrote later:
  
  Suddenly my dogs charged out and attacked something which I at first thought
  was a dingo, but when it yelled I knew at once that it was a blackfellow
  and that an attack had been planned. I looked at my two revolvers, which
  were always in the belt around my waist day and night, and then hurriedly
  inspected the gun and rifle and found all the weapons ready.
    Meanwhile the nigger who had been seized by the dogs was having a bad
  time, and I determined to save his life, although I knew he was after mine.
  I put my head out cautiously and whistled the dogs off ... the blackfellow
  ... was badly bitten and torn, but I saw that he would recover ... I made
  him understand that I did not intend to kill him and that if he crawled
  to an old wurley about 400 yards away his friends would find him ..
    That night the whole story travelled far, and it was known that I had
  savage dogs and that I had spared the life of the man who had gone to kill
  me. I never again had any trouble with the blacks, and could do almost 
  anything with them ...

  While this is the only detailed account of such an encounter remaining,
there were probably other similar occurrences; the possibility is implicit
in the comments of an unidentified Cooper pioneer who in 1878 wrote to a
friend, refering to the Aborigines:

  They are very harmless fellows when kept in their place, but treacherous
  if too well treated; they have a great respect for me, the reason of which
  is that I keep a good supply of physic such as Holloway's pills and ointment,
  pain-killer, chlorodyne, salts, etc., and never go about without a revolver
  in my belt - just that they may see it.
  
  On the whole the Aboriginal inhabitants allowed themselves to be dispossessed
of their waterholes and hunting grounds with no more than token protest.
As Conrick found, a show of strength won their respect and, while the white
man remained for many years wary of the Aborigines along the Cooper, there
were only isolated examples of confrontation.
  The differences between the two cultures were most easily comprehended
at the superficial level. In 1881 an observer at Elder's Perricherrie Station
on the Cooper described the Aborigines:

  They are even too lazy to get food, although they occasionally go out
  on hunting expeditions. They are disgusting and beastly filthy in their
  habits. Cleanliness is studiously avoided even in their eating, sand,
  charcoal and ashes all helping to fill up. They also eat fleas and lice,
  with which they abound. Their ceremonies - making wind, rain, rats, etc.,
  are simply orgies for the display of disgusting vices. Their corroborees,
  too, are mostly a combination of obscene expressions. There is not one
  redeeming trait in their character, and it is only fear of the whites
  which keeps them in subjection ...
                                 
  These were the attitudes of the white population generally and not confined
to the settlers around Cooper Creek. There was no understanding on the
white man's part of the culture of the people - worse, there was no awareness
of its existence. The visible manifestations of his complex and intensely
satisfying spiritual life were dismissed as loathesome superstition, his
social customs as incomprehensible oddities, his nakedness and his dances
labelled obscene. His inability to care adequately for the clothes the white
man insisted that he wear resulted in a litter of filthy rags which further
prejudiced the white community against him.
  There was however an even deeper gulf between the cultures which was
then, as now, the least understood of all the many differences between
the races. This was the concept of land ownership.
  To the Aborigine, the idea that a man could own the earth from which he
came was unthinkable. Man was an integral part of the land, from which his
spirit emanated and to which it returned, so that man could no more be
separated from his country than the rocks and earth which formed its physical
being. The spiritual bond between land and man gave him the right to range
over his country at will during his lifetime, the benefits of its
fruitfulness, and a resting place for his soul after his death. Land and
Man were one, in perpetuity.
  In European eyes, land is a commodity to be owned or traded as circumstances
dictate; that ownership precludes the free movement of others over the land,
and the products of that land become the sole property of the owner. The
two philosophies are totally incompatible, and it was the mutual inability
to understand that any viewpoint other than one's own existed that caused
the most anger and bewilderment on both sides. The Aborigines did not recognize
that the building of a hut and the introduction of strange animals could
prevent them from ranging freely over their own country; the white man could
not understand why the Aborigine persistently trespassed on private property
and speared animals which did not belong to him.
  Nevertheless, although the presence of the white man disrupted the
Aborigine's way of life and required him to adapt his material culture to
fit the new circumstances, it in no way altered his philosophy. He remained
confidently at one with his country, knowing his true place in the cosmos
and continuing the ceremonies which he believed maintained that cosmos until
well into the twentieth century. The friction which arose between the races
was not therefore over land ownership - both races being equally secure
on that point - but over the use of the land.
  An example of the conflict caused by restrictions on Aboriginal freedom
of movement occurred in the early days on Haddon Downs. Haddon was situated
on the traditional route between the Cooper and the pituri country of western
Queensland, along which passed a heavy traffic with parties of men
loaded down with blankets and clothing to barter for pituri. Overseer John
Howe claimed to have had trouble with the Aborigines in the early days when
the station was first occupied, and interference with this important
traditional trade was probably the cause.
  The wanderings of the Aborigines were usually accepted as an unavoidable
evil by the settlers, but their presence near water needed for stock was
undesirable. Everywhere, the Aborigine was driven away in dry seasons from
the good waterholes to make room for the cattle, and if he returned he was
harassed, somtimes shot at, and moved on again until the lesson was learned.
  Having accepted the white man, however reluctantly, as a permanent fact
of life, the Aborigines made the best of things. For the white man's tomahawk,
cast-off clothes, kerosene tins and tobacco they acted as guides through
the country they knew so intimately; for rations and a little money to exchange
for clay pipes, moleskin trousers and bright bandanas they learned to ride
the horses which had so terrified their fathers, and became shepherds and
stockmen among the beasts which had ousted them from their waterholes. They
exchanged the freedom to wander for a wide-brimmed hat, the hurly-burly
of the muster and a permanent camp near the homestead with a regular supply
of beef offal. The men made themselves indispensable to the settlers with
their seemingly instinctive skill with horses, intimate knowledge of the
seasons and the waters, and ability to track straying stock and lost white
men over difficult terrain.
  The stations remained predominantly male communities, so Aboriginal women
too had their uses; if this was ever the cause of conflict between the races,
no record remains even in local folklore. When white women did come, like
Mrs Colless on Innamincka and Mrs Burkitt on Tinga Tingana in the 1870s,
a few Aboriginal women could be trained to housework. Aboriginal women were
also used as messengers, carrying papers and goods to the construction camps
on Cordillo Downs, and carrying the mail from Cordillo to Haddon Downs.
They also worked as shepherds and at the woolscours at shearing time.
  One settler was grateful for the Aboriginal women's ability to forage:

  I am not altogether without vegetable food, as I get the blacks to bring
  me a lot of `yougher', a small root about the size of a large pea, which
  has the appearance of a small onion, with a taste, when cooked, between
  a raw potato and a dried pea.


</sample>
