Living off the land  

Aboriginal people have probably lived aound Uluru for over 10 000 years.
Excavations in the James Range, 80 kilometres east of Alice Springs, produced
material more than 10 000 years old (Gould, n.d., p.8), and the more recent
excavation at Puntutjarpa, 400 kilometres west of Uluru, in Western Australia,
uncovered camp debris shown by radiocarbon dating to be about 10 200 years
old (Gould, 1971, p.165). Richard Gould found that, despite small changes
in the stone tools of different ages in Puntutjarpa rockshelter, the evidence
was generally of `a stable hunting and foraging way of life which can be
regarded as the Australian desert culture' (Gould 1971, p.174).
  The culture was a subsistence one; that is, the people produced all they
needed locally and, unlike the Europeans who brought the pastoral economy
to central Australia, did not specialise in the production of single foods.
The only things traded were ceremonial items, such as pearl shell from
Australia's north coast. To supply all their needs from the semi-desert
in which they live, people must know where to look for many different animals
and plants, and where water, scarce as it is, can be found.
  Pitjantjatjara dialects recognise at least four distinct types of country:
the mulga flats, open sand dunes, rocky hills and the encircling trees around
rock faces such as those at Uluru. Each must be visited from time to time
to obtain vital resources - different parts of the bush favour different
plant species and animals also have their favoured habitats. Water is never
present in large quantities.  Rain falls irregularly to fill rock holes
among the hills and replenish soaks in dry creek beds, where the sand can
be dug away until water seeps into the hole. The Aborigines moved
opportunistically, retiring to base camps in drought, spreading out after
rain.
  
 Useful plants  

The semi-desert country around Uluru is a varied one. In open country,
sandhills alternate with low-lying flats, and many useful plants grow in
each environment. Spinifex, desert oaks and light scrub grow on the windblown
sand of the dunes, and mulga grows on the intervening flats.
According to Peter Latz (1978, p.81), the largest variety of food plants
is found on the sandhills, yet this is also the habitat where drinking water
is most scarce.
  Mulga seeds were ground for flour. Mulga wood is used to make spear-throwers,
throwing sticks and coolamons (wooden bowls). The Ayers Rock mulga grows
long, straight branches, which are shaped into heavy stabbing spears called
winta. The roots of the witchetty bush, which also grows on mulga flats,
are dug up and broken open to take out the witchetty grubs: one side of
the bush growing less well than the other is a sign that grubs are in the
roots. Another clue is the presence of discarded skins of adult insects
that have emerged. The seeds of woolly-butt grass and `native millet', which
also grow in mulga country, were harvested and ground to make flour, from
which unleavened bread was baked in the ashes of a fire. The red flowers
of the Eremophila bush are filled with a sugary nectar, which can be sucked
from the base of the flower.
  In the sandhills, different types of plant can be found growing on the
ridges and in the hollows. On the ridges grow a grevillea with nectar-filled
flowers, and also wild `plum' trees. The Gyrostemon tree provides lightweight
timber for carving carrying dishes. Emu-poison bush provided poison which
was put in water where emus came to drink; the leaves of ilpara, waterbush,
were burnt to an ash and mixed with the `chewing tobacco' picked from the
base of rock faces at Uluru. In the hollows, at the foot of desert oaks,
grows a solanum with an edible fruit, sometimes called a wild tomato, which
is considered to taste like a grape. Spinifex grass provides natural gum,
which was used to mount the stone blade on the end of a spear-thrower. The
desert `poplar', a botanical relative of Gyrostemon, also grows in the
sandhills, and its soft wood is sometimes used for animal carvings.
  The steep rock faces of Uluru and Katatjuta harbour different species:
Ilyi, the rock fig and a wild `plum', which, although classed botanically
with the sandhill species, is given a different name by the Pitjantjatjara.
The tumbled boulders at the foot of rock faces are the source of `chewing
tobacco', and light hunting spears are made from the spear bush, urtjanpa.
  In the Petermanns and Musgraves, more gentle hill slopes predominate.
Here distinctive species of acacia grow, including utjalpara, a source of
witchetty grubs and a sweet gum exuded by insects which Aboriginal children
liked to suck. One middle-aged man explained, `I often got a lolly from
that one when I was a little boy.'
  Rain falling on the vast expanses of bare rock at Uluru, Katatjuta and
smaller outcrops flows out across the surrounding soil before soaking away.
These sheet-flooding zones harbour flourishing colonies of bloodwood trees.
Bloodwood provides timber for making several types of coolamon, including
the deep bowls called piti, the scoops called wirra, and spear-throwers.
Between the bloodwoods can be found a low, crawling plant with a red, fleshy
stem called wakati, which bears a seed that was ground to make flour. The
grass kunakanti, which also has edible seeds, grows here, as does an edible
solanum. Different species of eucalypt grow beside creeks: Apara, river
red gum (Eucalyptus camaldulensis), grows along Britten-Jones Creek and
gives its name to the soak, creek and country, Aparanya; in the vicinity
of Docker River, the ghost gum (Eucalyptus papuana) also occurs. River red
gum and ghost gum provide wood for coolamons and other artefacts.

 Animal habitats  

Many animals tend to live in only one of these plant habitats. The red
kangaroo is restricted to level grassland and is mainly found on the mulga
flats; the euro feeds in spinifex on hill and rock slopes (Frith 1973, pp.273
and 281). Although the emu lives in sandhill country, it was often caught
near water, either by covering the main rock hole with stones and poisoning
smaller pools, or by spearing the birds as they came to drink. Men hid behind
artificial stone hides or natural boulders, because emus which drank poisoned
water would try to regurgitate and the hunters had to rush out to wrestle
with the birds, keeping their beaks shut.

 Change in subsistence activities  

Some plants, such as spinifex and the wild plum, grow in more than one habitat,
and resources such as nectar or wood for coolamons and spear-throwers can
be obtained from more than one species, but each habitat must have been
regularly exploited for its unique resources. The disappearance of traditional
subsistence activities would have as big an impact on the region's ecology
as the extinction of one of the main animal species, but Aboriginal people
still rely on the bush for many things. Kangaroo and euro meat are preferred
to beef; so is rabbit. Artefacts for sale are still made from traditional
materials. Withetty grubs are enjoyed. At Kikingkura outstation we saw edible
berries harvested. Although this was not done regularly by the people living
at Uluru, children were quick to pick wild `plums' and `tomatoes' when
they could, during expeditions to the sandhills.
  One of the biggest changes since White contact has been the disappearance
of controlled burning of the bush. Peter Latz (1978) writes that many of
the most important food plants appear during the early stages of regrowth
after minor fires, and that controlled burning of small patches of bush
was an everyday part of foraging expeditions. Early explorers repeatedly
found parties of Aboriginal people firing the land. Since people have been
gathered into missions or settled around station homesteads, regular burning
has largely ceased. In the 1970s several years of good rainfall caused a
build up of inflammable scrub, grass and branches, resulting in disastrous
wildfires that swept over wide areas in the Uluru National Park during 1976.
  Aboriginal diet has also changed since contact. It is thought that when
people were entirely dependent on the bush for food, meat made up only 20
to 30 per cent of the diet (see Gould 1969a). With traditional weapons,
animals such as kangaroo or euro were hard to catch. Paddy Uluru once recalled
how as a young man he had killed a kangaroo at Tjulu (now the site of Curtin
Springs homestead) and carried it back to Uluru, a distance of 80 kilometres.
Richard Gould, living with people in the bush in Western Australia during
1966 to 1967, found that the women produced an average of 4.5 kilograms
of vegetable food each day, devoting 4 1/2 hours to collection and 2 1/2 hours
to preparation, while the men found only lizards. Although reliable, collecting
vegetable foods could be hard work. Peter Brokensha asked Pitjantjatjara
women living at an outstation from Amata to make damper from wild millet,
kaltu kaltu (Brokensha 1975, p.25). He found that to gather less than 2
kilograms of seed from an area within 1 kilometre of their camp took three
women 3 hours. To grind, winnow and cook the seed took another 2 hours.
Although, as he says, there was a mad scramble among the camp's children
for a piece of the cooking, it is not surprising that purchased flour has
almost completely replaced indigenous sources. At Yuendumu in the mid-1970s,
almost 30 per cent by weight of purchased food was flour; at Yalata a family
of five would buy 11 kilograms of white flour a week (figures cited in Peterson
1978, p.32; see also Rose 1965,pp.31-2; Cutter 1978, p.67 and Brokensha
1975, p.25).
  The amount of meat obtained from the bush has, on the other hand, probably
increased, not only because guns are more effective than spears, but also
because cattle grazing and bore water help kangaroos to flourish (Frith
1978, p.90). The introduced rabbit has also become a major source of meat.
At Brokensha's outstation, rabbits were eaten practically all the time (1975).
W.V. MacFarlane, who briefly visited two outstations in Western Australia
during the 1960s, records that at Kutjuntari seven euros were shot in eight
days, and at Warawiya the men, using .22 rifles `brought in a kangaroo almost
every day' (1978, pp.51 and 54).
  Appendix C lists the observed hunting trips made by people at Uluru during
the period of my fieldwork. There is no reason to think the euro or the
kangaroo, let alone the rabbit, is threatened, because people's subsistence
needs limit the amount of hunting. The only threat to natural resources
seems to be that of commercial exploitation. D. Roff suggests that the
brushtail possum became locally extinct during early contact times because
too many were killed to sell their skins to White men (1976, p.15). Sedentary
life also exacerbates the local depletion of resources around camps, which
is one of the reasons people in settlements rely more on purchased foods.
N.B Tindale's comments on traditional camps (quoted below) suggest that
this may always have been a problem.

 Traditional artefacts  

Traditional Western Desert tools and implements have been described by
Brokensha (1975) and B. Hayden (1979). Brokensha describes how the
spear-thrower is made from a slab of wood split from a mulga tree using
metal tools; Hayden described how stone tools were used for the same purpose.
The same technique is used to obtain wood for wooden bowls, throwing sticks
and other implements. Paddy Uluru used axe blades as far as possible as
wedges rather than cutting tools, paralleling the way in which Hayden shows
stone wedges and axes to have been used. This technique does not kill the
tree from which the wood is obtained. Both Hayden and Brokensha describe
how digging sticks and spears are made. Only the straightest of urtjanpa
limbs are suitable for making spears. They are cut at the base and pulled
downwards out of the tangled mass of intertwined branches. Twigs must be
trimmed off, traditionally with a stone adze, like those mounted on
spear-throwers, and the stem straightened by warming it in a fire.

