<sample>
	<id> F30 </id>
	


	<source> A history of bush nursing in Victoria - 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2014 words </note>
	   


	<h> CHAPTER 3 </h>
	


	<h> The Nurses </h>
	

In March 1912 Victoria had a mere half dozen bush nursing centres, New South
Wales had four and Tasmania just one. South Australia was still considering
whether to send district nurses north into the outback, although five country
towns in the south-east were already served. A Melbourne Herald writer felt
bound to trumpet the virtues of this handful of women:
  
Of all women workers, perhaps the Australian bush nurse stands highest ...
A nurse with a heart, brain and education can tell the young mother just
what she should know, just what the State school utterly failed to teach
her ... if she happens to be a woman fit for the position, (she) is the
true missionary ... (bush nurses) often do the work of doctor, servant and
nurse combined. More than that ... they think healthy thoughts ... and inspire
their patients with something of their own feelings. 

  Such fulsome praise could have rebounded against the fledgling movement.
Other branches of the nursing profession were as dedicated to ideals which
were given lofty expression in the first issue of Una, the Victorian Trained
Nurses Association journal, in 1903. Its summary concluded:

Nursing is today an Art and a Science; Art is as wide as Truth itself, and
Science to quote the admirable dictum of Huxley is `nothing more than trained
and organized common sense'.

  Besides ignoring the work of other nurses, the Herald's portrait of a
paragon slighted doctors, educationists, missionaries and servants.
Nevertheless, the bush nurse did stand somewhat apart, even in the climate
of rising professionalism among nurses.
  In the first two decades of the twentieth century few nurses were employed
in public hospitals once they were through their training. Those who were 
	<note> commer missing </note>
	 battled to improve nursing conditions such as the poor quality of hospital
food and working longer than their rostered shift. They were often on duty
for ten or twelve hours. Their last resort was resignation, sometimes en
masse as happened at the Women's Hospital in April 1912. The RVTNA, however,
was loath to sanction public negotiation on hospital salaries, fearing
that it would be likened to a trade union or accused of overburdening a
charity. Some certificated nurses worked in private hospitals, especially
the newer ones which accepted only trained staff. But generally they took
on private cases, working from a `home' run by an experienced nurse who
acted as manager, taking calls and alotting jobs.
  In this private area the RVTNA was keen to set fee levels which were not
to be undercut. The daily rate was 10s 6d for twelve hours and double that
for twenty-four hours. When a nurse was engaged on a weekly basis and lived
in the patient's house the fee was 2£ 7s 6d for ordinary cases,
2£ 18s for midwifery and 3£ 8s 6d for serious cases. These
included fevers and infections, mental and alcoholic conditions, the first
week of pneumonia and care after major operations. In these cases the nurse
was to be allowed, `if possible', two hours for outside exercise each day
and at least six consecutive hours for sleep.  Although private nurses'
weekly earnings might be twice or even three times more than those of hospital
nurses, their board and lodging had to be paid between `home' cases as well
as during longer leave.
  The RVTNA was careful to see that the principles underlying these fees
and conditions were not infringed by the bush nursing scheme. The Association
similarly scrutinized the formation in June 1910 of a visiting nurses
scheme, whereby a private nurse took on a number of patients, visiting them
once or twice a day while instructing relatives or friends in their full-time
care. The scheme was aimed at those who could not afford a resident nurse.
By 1919 the Visiting Nurses Association was operating in many Melbourne
suburbs including Coburg and in provincial cities like Bendigo. To encourage
expansion, the Association then adopted `the co-operative principle', meaning 
that annual subscribers could call on the nurses free of charge.
  It was the isolation of the bush nurse from medical and hospital support
which made her role distinct from that of hospital, visiting, private or
district nurse. She was called on to exercise high levels of intiative,
independence and often ingenuity. There was also her work with school children
and their parents in promoting health care and preventive medicine. This
was well received from the outset and often surprisingly productive.
  Following the pattern established at Beech Forest, Education department
subsidies were granted to new centres according to the number of isolated
schools the nurse was able to visit. By 1917 this grant amounted to 250£
a year but that total remained the same while new centres were constantly
being created, so some received no subsidy at all. Almost without exception
these centres encouraged their nurses to do school visiting and bore the
full cost of her salary unassisted. Local committees had often been stirred 
by the talk, illustrated by a set of lantern slides prepared in 1914, which the
Association's travelling superintendent Miss E.M. Greer gave in districts
which registered interest in obtaining a bush nurse. The school visits always
prompted the most questions from the audience and swung many who had been
undecided into support for the scheme.
  In outlining the duties and responsibilities of the nurse to schools the
Education department asked in 1911 that suggestions and criticisms to help
develop the usefulness of the work be added to the monthly report of the
school visits. The nurse could instruct parents how to deal with minor ailments
such as sores, cuts and chilblains. Printed instructions were issued on
steps to be taken when hair, skin or clothing was unclean, usually
vermin-infested. By promptly recognizing infectious diseases and fevers,
and skin conditions such as scabies or ringworm, treatment including the
child's exclusion from school could be arranged. Parents were to be instructed
about chronic conditions such as discharging ears and conjunctivitis, and
encouraged to get medical attention for any serious condition. Where there
was evidence that children were seriously neglected or overworked the matter
was to be reported to the department's medical officers. Children who were
repeatedly absent from school through illness could be visited at home to
try to identify any contributing cause.
  By 1918 superintendent Greer claimed noticeable improvements in the health
and cleanliness of children in out-of-the-way places where the nurse visited.
This was confirmed by the laconic report of one local committee that parents
always knew when the nurse's visit was due because their children paid
extraordinary attention to soap and water that morning. Small measures such
as a water mug for each child and separate pegs for hats and coats lessened
cross-infection.
  Poor diet was still a handicap to better health. An intake of little besides
corned beef, white bread and sugary tea was identified by Greer as the cause
of teeth decaying before they were through the gums, two and three-year-olds
unable to walk because of undeveloped limbs, and backwardness in education
levels by up to two years. The same diet meant that men at fifty or even
forty were no longer fit for work. Milk was seldom used by households, even
in dairying districts, and fruit and vegetables were even more uncommon.
In response the nurses invited mothers to come after school on visiting
days to talk about food values, infant feeding and the care of sickly or
delicate children. In 1919 the Bush Nursing Association sent a submission
to the Education minister, stressing the importance of cookery and food
value lectures and lessons. This `health missioner' role of the nurse was
later extended through the infant welfare movement. Bush nurses were among
the first students at the infant welfare training school which opened at
South Melbourne in October 1920.
  After Mary Thompson's appointment early in 1911 Edith Barrett and Mrs
Lang, the Melbourne District Nursing Society's representatives on Council,
organized the purchase of the nurse's outfit which included a uniform and
bag of equipment. The dress was pale grey with a white apron, collar and
cuffs, and the only adornment was the badge presented to each nurse at
her installation. Lady Dudley donated the cost of the badges, which had
been designed at her request by Miss Officer of the Arts and Crafts society.
They featured an enamelled green beech leaf recalling Beech Forest, and
the motto `By love serve one another'. When Lady Dudley died in July 1920
the presentation of badges ceased.
  A typical nurse's cap and veil of the period may have been issued for
indoor use, but riding habit and oilskins were usual wear during much of
the nurse's time on duty. Stout boots were essential. Nurse Tucker, who
succeeded Mary Thompson at Beech Forest, once walked eight kilometres in
three quarters of an hour on a call to a seriously ill patient in the bush.
After 1913 novices were given rudimentary instruction at a Melbourne riding
school on how to handle a horse. Advanced skills in riding or driving a
gig, however, came only from hard experience.
  At first most nurses carried their equipment in a portmanteau, although
Gunbower's nurse in 1913, Ida Crook, slung a kit-bag across her shoulders
and rode a pony called Natty. From the end of that year the kit included
two black leather saddlebags with VBNA stamped in letters half an inch high.
Packed in these or the portmanteau were waterproof sheeting, buttercloth,
absorbent wool, calico and strapping (which seems to have replaced formal
leg and arm splints). There were also rubber gloves, douche, enema, catheter,
bedpan, kidney dish, measure, invalid feeding equipment, lysol and sterilizing
tablets, eye dropper and drops, surgical needles, scissors, thread and forceps,
a thermometer, hot water bag, tongue depressor and simple ointments and
medicaments such as Vaseline, tannic and boracic acids, and castor and olive
oils. A medical relic of bygone days was the half pint pot of Prunier's brandy.
A hypodermic syringe with morphia and strychnine tablets was added in 1913
but the brandy stayed on the list. It was occasionally used as a stimulant.
A nail-brush and soft soap for cleansing, and an exercise book and temperature
charts for recording case histories completed the equipment.
  An order for sheets, pillow-cases, towels and a blanket was put through
in February 1911 but this seems to have been unique to Beech Forest and
was perhaps meant for use in the ambulance. Each nurse's outfit originally
cost about 12£, and replacement of stores and chemist supplies quickly
mounted to more than 10£ a year. In May 1913 local committees were
made responsible for replacements of drugs, following, where possible,
the advice of the doctor whose help the nurse was likely to call on in serious
cases. The local `drug safe' administered by the bush nurse was to prove
of great benefit in isolated districts. The cost of the original kit items,
supplied out of central funds, rose by fifty per cent between 1913 and 1919.
  The nurse's salary remained at 135£ a year until late in 1919.
Out of this she paid her own board. The rise to 150£ was granted
partly because New South Wales bush nurses were being offered 170£.
However, even before 1919 local committees in Victoria were asked to refund
the nurse any board costs over 35£ so that she could clear at least
100£. Further adjustments came in September 1921 when the salary for
a nurse with just a midwifery certificate was set at 150£, and for
a double certificated nurse 175£. Centres with nurses in the latter
category were offered the alternative of providing free board and a 150£
salary. Three weeks annual leave on full pay was standard from the beginning.
Costs of travel to and from a posting, and of all travel on duty were paid
by the local centre and were minimized by free passes for railway travel.
  For the first year or two recruitment of nurses was fairly easy but their
resignation rate was high. Most often the reason was marriage, as zest,
competence and compassion were undoubtedly attractive qualities. 


</sample>
