<subsample>
	<id> F31b </id>
	


	<source> Nature &amp; Health - Spring 1986 </source>
	


	<h> The Magnetic Factor, </h>
	


	<bl> Christobel Munson </bl>
	

  What on earth has magnetism to do with health? One concerns the physical,
fleshly body, nutrition, caring - the other is to do with iron, steel, electric
currents and magnetic fields. The two seem diametrically opposed, or so
I thought until I investigated further. For it seems that for centuries
man has observed a distinct reaction in the body to the pull of magnetism:
be it to the turning of the tides affected by the moon's magnetic pull or
simply the placing of magnets directly on injured parts of the body to speed
up healing.
  It turns out that the entire planet is under the influence of magnetism
- and we're all included in that. We talk of someone having `animal magnetism'
or charm, or `magnetic appeal' - a type of personal charisma. But there's
more to it than just a lure-of-the jungle vibration. Doctors these days
are saying that some period problems in women may be caused by magnetic
field problems: apparently women with menstruation problems emit a highter
electric charge than others. With simple protoplasmic bodies, the immediate
effects as a result of contact with magnets are astounding and profound.
And with our bodies, the effects can be just as amazing.
  Considerable research has been done in the East, especially in Japan and
China, and also throughout Europe - especially in Austria, Germany and the
Scandinavian countries - concerning the effects of magnetic power on the
body. In the United States, orthopaedic surgeons have been experimenting
with inserting magnets into plaster casts to aid healing. Here in Australia,
the biggest impact regarding health and magnetism has, to date, been with
horses. Local trainers know well the extraordinary results of electro-magnetic
blankets on injured horses; electro-magnetic paddles are held over fracture
sites to considerably aid healing and the union of bones. A magneto-pulse
is directed to the injured area at regular intervals and the horse can be
back in action in three weeks, not six, this way. This has been common knowledge
in the horse-training world for at least ten years.
  So if it works for horses - why not us?
  It does work. And it has been doing so all along. We just haven't been
into it for a few centuries. In prehistoric times in China, lode stones
made of magnetic material were used on acupuncture point sites, before there
was acapuncture. This aided the healing process. Egyptian priests investigated
and used magnetic fields for therapeutic use and other ancient physicians
such as Hippocrates, Paracelsus and Galen all investigated the use of magnetic
energy in healing.
  According to one Sydney medical doctor specialising in acupuncture, the
power of magnetic fields was 're-discovered' by space scientists, both
Russian and American, when the first men in space suffered from the
weightlessness and the lack of gravity. What worked best to set them straight,
as it were, was magnetic-field therapy. This oriental doctor's main practice
is dealing with people with chronic degenerative heart disease, and people
often come to him when they've exhausted all other avenues of healing.
  `Many people come to me with low energy,' he told me. `They are depleted,
with chronic illness, post-glandular fever, post-hepatitis, and their healing
power is poor. And for them I use magnetic-field therapy. It's an ancient
treatment. Today, like many medical doctors, I investigate all kinds of
wholistic ways to heal.' Acupuncture and magnetic-field therapy are intertwined, he explained as magnetic-field therapy centres on stimulating the acupuncture points and meridians around the body to accelerate healing or pain relief.


</subsample>
