<sample>
	<id> F32 </id>
	


	<source> A home guide to diagnosing illness - women </source>
	


	<note> 2014 words </note>
	

  
	<h> The female body </h>
	

A woman is female from the moment she is conceived. This is determined by
the pattern of chromosomes (thread-like structures within each living cell
that contain genetic information) in the fertilized egg. Every woman has
23 pairs of chromosomes, 22 are the same as for men, but the 23rd pair is
different. It consists of two X-chromosomes. Men have one X- and one
Y-chromosome. The two X-chromosomes are responsible for ensuring the
development of internal and external genitals such as ovaries, fallopian
tubes, womb and vagina. Hormones secreted by the ovaries and other glands
during fetal growth are thought to affect the development of the brain and
its sense of being female.
  The feminine body shape is largely the result of the action of the sex
hormones oestrogen and progesterone, which are responsible for the development
of features known as secondary sexual characteristics - full, round and
mature breasts; rounded swelling hips; thighs well padded with fat; a
well-defined, curved waistline; absence of hair on the torso and face. Other
distinctly female characteristics include a relatively high-pitched voice
and a higher proportion of body fat. The rising and falling levels at which
oestrogen and progesterone are secreted by the ovaries, are also responsible
for the regular monthly changes that are known as the menstrual cycle (see
p.117).
  Because of differences between the physical and hormonal make-up of men and
women, there are small but important differences in the susceptibility of
each sex to certain disorders. The monthly bleeding experienced by women
means they suffer more often than men from anaemia (lack of sufficient red
blood cells). For reasons not yet understood fully, women seem to more susceptible
to liver damage from alcohol and so should drink less. On the positive side,
the female sex hormones may well provide extra protection against coronary
heart disease up until the menopause. Women generally live longer than men;
average life expectation is 76 for women, 70 for men. Some of these additional
years can be attributed to the fact that fewer women have traditionally
been smokers. The gap now seems to be narrowing - perhaps as a result of
the changes in women's lifestyle over the past few decades.


	<h> The changing body </h>
	

Most body systems lose some efficiency as a result of the ageing process,
partly because specialist cells die and are not replaced, and partly because
tissues become less elastic and more fibrous. Loss of elasticity due to
age is most obvious in the skin, and this process may be accelerated by
excessive exposure to sunlight and by smoking. By the time a woman approaches
middle-age she tends to gain weight, and muscle tone may become more lax,
especially if she has not taken regular exercise. An unhealthy life style
- particularly lack of exercise and a poor diet - may exaggerate the physical
effects of ageing. The most significant milestone of the middle years is
the menapause (see p. 116), when a woman ceases to be fertile and menstruation
no longer occurs.
  Following the menopause the ageing process continues. One possible
development is a thinning of the bones, which may become brittle and easily
broken by minor falls. In later years, compression of the bones of the spine
can lead to loss of height, and there may be loss of weight due to wasting
of muscle. As the body ages it has fewer resources with which to withstand
periods of ill health, and the healing process of minor injuries slows down
considerably. Even so, if you take regular, vigorous exercise throughout
your life, you will be likely to have much the same body shape at 60 as
you have had at 30.


	<h> Skeleton </h>
	

The bony skeleton provides the rigid structure that supports the muscles
and provides a protective framework for the organs. Female bones are generally
slightly lighter than a male's, and the pelvis wider in order to allow a
baby's head and body to pass during childbirth. Bone itself is made up of
a protein hardened with calcium salts. It is living material with cells
that are constantly replacing old bone with new material. To maintain healthy
bones, you need adequate amounts of protein, calcium and vitamins in your
diet.


	<h> Muscles </h>
	

Movement of the body and its internal organs is carried out by the muscles.
These are made up of a soft tissue arranged in fibres which can contract
and relax to produce movement. There are two distinct types of muscle:
voluntary muscles, which control body movement, and involuntary muscles,
which are responsible for movement within the body - for example, the womb,
which expands to an enormous extent during pregnancy.
  Muscles normally remain in good condition if used regularly. Vigorous
exercise increases the size of muscles and improves the circulation of blood
to them, thereby increasing their capacity for still more strenuous activity.
Conversely, inactivity can soon lead to muscle-wasting and weakness.


	<h> Respiratory system </h>
	

Respiration - inhaling (breathing in) and exhaling (breathing out) air -
allows the blood to absorb oxygen essential for the production of energy.
As the blood passes through the lungs it gives off carbon dioxide and water
as waste products.
  The respiratory system consists of the lungs and tubes through which air
passes on its way to and from the lungs. Air is breathed in through the
nose and mouth, passes down the trachea (windpipe) and enters the lungs
through a branching tree of tubes - the bronchi and bronchioles.
  The respiratory system normally remains in good health unless damaged by repeated
exposure to pollutants in the atmosphere, including dust from industrial
or agricultural processes and tobacco smoke, or by repeated infection.


	<h> Fat distribution </h>
	

Fat is deposited in a layer under the skin and within the tissues in other
parts of the body including the buttocks, breasts and inside the abdominal
cavity. It makes up 20 to 25 per cent of a woman's weight (compared with
15 per cent of a man's) and is distributed in such a way as to give a woman's
body its characteristic contours. Fat is laid down when food intake is greater
than is needed to fuel the body's energy requirements. It is burnt up when
food intake fails to meet the body's need. It also acts as insulation against
cold.
  Both too much and too little fat in the body can be unhealthy. Being too
fat can lead to heart and circulation problems. Being too thin is less of
a health risk, but may be a sign of undernourishment and can lead to reduced
resistance to a variety of diseases. Fluctuations in the level of fat deposits
is almost always the result of an imbalance between food intake and energy
output.


	<h> Heart and circulation </h>
	

The heart is a muscular pump with four chambers into which enter the major
blood vessels carrying blood to and from the rest of the body. As the heart
rhythmically squeezes the chambers, making them expand and contract, blood
flows in the correct direction.
  Blood transports oxygen and nutrients (see Blood analysis, p. 22) to all
parts of the body and carries away waste products. It circulates via the
arteries, which carry &quot;used&quot; blood. Good blood circulation, essential for
the health of every organ in the body, depends on the efficient functioning
of the heart muscle and partly on the ease of blood flow through the arteries.
  It also depends on the blood vessels remaining free from any obstruction,
such as fatty deposits*desposits or blood clots. High blood pressure (hypertension)
may damage the blood vessels or increase the risk of blockage of the blood
vessels. For advice on reducing the risks of diseases of the heart and
circulation, see Coronary heart disease, p. 100.
  Women under the age of 50 are relatively free from coronary heart disease.
This is thought to be partly due to larger amounts of the hormones progesterone
and oestrogen being present in the body. 


	<h> The circulatory system </h>
	

The circulatory system carries blood to and from every part of the body.
The centre of the system is the heart. Arteries carry blood away from the
heart; veins return blood to the heart.


	<h> Arteries and veins </h>
	

The walls of arteries need to be strong, because blood is forced along them
under high pressure, so they are made of four layers. Arteries and their
various branches (arterioles) are surrounded by muscle which allows them
to dilate or contract to regulate the body temperature. Veins have less
elastic, less muscular walls. Valves in the veins stop blood from flowing
in the wrong direction.


	<h> Heart vessels </h>
	

The heart is divided into two by the septa. Each side has two chambers -
an atrium, and a ventricle - linked by a one-way valve. The left atrium
and ventricle control oxygenated blood, and those on the right de-oxygenated
(&quot;used&quot;) blood. The septa prevents the two types of blood from mixing.


	<h> Brain and nervous system </h>
	

The brain and nervous system together provide the control mechanism for both
conscious activities, such as thought and movement, and for unconscious
body functions such as breathing and digestion. Nerves also provide the
means by which we register sensations such as pain and temperature.
  The brain and nervous system require a constant supply of oxygenated blood.
Disruption of the blood flow to any part of the system is one of the most
common causes of malfunctioning of the brain and nervous system. Therefore,
the prevention of circulatory trouble (see left) is important. Injury,
infection, degeneration, tumours and diseases of unknown cause may also
affect the brain and nervous system. Certain disorders may arise out of
abnormal electrical activity or chemical imbalances in the brain.


	<h> The nervous system </h>
	

The brain and the nerve tracts of the spinal cord together make up the central
nervous system. A network of peripheral nerves, which are named after the
four regions of the spine, link the central system with other parts of the
body.


	<h> The brain </h>
	

The brain itself is the most complex organ in the body; many aspects of
its structure and function are not yet fully understood. Different parts
of the brain seem to control different activities. The two cerebral hemispheres
control conscious thought and movement, and interpret signals from the sensory
organs. The cerebellum regulates some subconscious activities such as
coordination of movement and balance. The brain stem governs vital body
functions such as heartbeat and breathing.


	<h> The senses </h>
	

The senses are the means by which we monitor the different aspects of our
environment. Five separate systems respond to different types of physical
stimuli: the eyes enable us to interpret visual information; the ears monitor
sound and control balance; the nose and tongue respond to different smells
and tastes respectively; and the sensory neves in the skin allow us to feel
physical contact (touch), changes in temperature, and pain.


	<h> Smell </h>
	

Smells are detected by the olfactory nerves. These hair-like organs project
into the top of the nasal cavity and absorb and analyse molecules from the
breathed-in air. The sense of smell may be damaged by smoking and may
temporarily be impaired by a common cold or hayfever. Permanent loss of
the sense of smell may occur following damage to the nerves, perhaps as a
result of a skull injury, or it may be caused by a disorder affecting the
part of the brain responsible for interpreting smell sensations.


	<h> Taste </h>
	

The main taste organs are the taste buds. These are located in hair-like
papillae that project from the upper surface of the tongue. They can
distinguish only four basic tastes: sweet, sour, salt and bitter. The taste
buds for each taste are located in a different area of the tongue. The sense
of taste is closely allied to the sense of smell, which helps us to
differentiate a greater range of flavours. Loss of the sense of smell is
the usual cause of impairment to the sense of taste, but certain drugs and
occasionally zinc deficiency may also have the same effect.


	<h> Touch </h>
	

The sense of touch, which includes all skin sensations, is conveyed through
the nerves from the sense receptors that lie under the surface of the skin.


</sample>
