Nutritious foods and drinks By Demeter Hillman  

  Travel in the past used to be an experience with stimulating, surprising
experiences of distinctive architecture, customs, food and drink. Travel
in our modern age, with mass transport, to well advertised destinations,
either on holiday or to cities, means experiencing the uniformity of western
civilisation in its various forms and climates, depending upon the Continent.
We are then persuaded that mass catering and processed foods and drinks
are to our benefit. Distinctions and distinctiveness have almost totally
been sacrificed to ambitions that serve a mass market.
  Many traditional foods and drinks with valuable health properties are
now almost unobtainable and finding an unpolluted area that has not been
saturated with mass travel, a beauty spot not spoilt, can be a problem unless
one is prepared to go some distance to maintain individuality.
  Growing economic problems for rural populations and the increasing influence
of technology have for many areas increased the plight of how to remain
self sufficient. Changing world influence, world markets and world tension
have created new population patterns, but in most instances a flight from
the land for an uprooted and unprotected rural population is a common fate.
With such uprooting much simple, but valuable knowledge and practices,
traditional food preparation, are lost. Such sad patterns have been experienced
for hundreds of years, but our age has accelerated this destructive process
and put nothing in its place.

 Creating Tranquility  

  The only compensation would be to once again create  conditions favourable
towards a return of an unhurried, unstressed way of life, in chosen rural
areas with programs for their restoration, without pollution and any violent
technology with an emphhasis on biological needs first, and in housing,
to be able to build biohouses without health hazards.
  Creating tranquil, unpolluted islands where the health of future generations
may be safeguarded is a priority in all countries because of the encroaching
adverse effects of what a violent technology already has created, threatening
the very existence of life on this planet. That is why the study of a
non-violent, advanced biology and ecology with a new awareness of past
and present should be a new priority.
  Also biological clothing is important in order to overcome the ever
increasing allergies and multiple allergies caused by many thousands of
chemicals everywhere in our environment near and far.
  Study of traditional food and drinks that have prophylactic properties
can be rewarding, also when it can be combined with reading books on travel
in the past, when it was still adventurous and hazardous and took perhaps
many weeks or even months to make progress across one Continent.

 Handing On Traditions  

  In remote areas of various countries one can still be assured of traditional
customs having kept their place, where people in rural areas are still able
to follow their natural life styles.
  Although in many areas in remote country regions the diet may have been
rather monotonous, in order to ensure survival, traditional knowledge on
how to prepare fermented foods would be passed on to the next generation
without question. Fermented foods ensured immunity against some illnesses
that threatened because of an absence of hygiene, but fermented foods and
drinks also ensured that hardships resulting from weather changes and exposure
to the elements need not be injurious to health.
  Plain foods were made piquant by means of the micro-organisms developing
in fermented foods and drinks, thereby enhancing or ennobling the foods
by increasing their food value.
  In recent centuries meat consumption has increased five fold and it has
become a symbol of affluence; its modern production has caused many new
health hazards, from hormones, antibiotics, implants of penicillin and
so on.
  In past centuries in some remote areas, potatoes and grains accounted
for 60%-80% of food by weight. This meant that ingenious preparation and
methods of serving, additions of herbs and spices, would provide stimulation,
together with the addition of some other vegetables.
  Until about 300 years ago, bread was baked by the sourdough fermentation
method and provided some of the necessary lactic acid, as did the traditional
drinks with health giving properties. In our modern foods we may find many
new ingredients that render the food sterile instead of keeping it full
of living micro-organisms to enhance the body's resistance to ill health.
  However, not all travellers in the past were prepared for what they found,
nor did they appreciate it. "The bread was normally black rye bread", an
English writer, travelling in Russia in the 1840s complained: "They ferment
their bread to the third or acetous degree; the black bread, unlike that
of all other countries, is bitter and sour, and as nauseous in the mouth
as alum." Others argued that Russian workers showed sound nutritional judgment
in preferring a bread that was well fermented and as heavy as possible,
the lactic acid which made bread sour was a vital dietary supplement and
its heaviness was also valued.

 Solid Food  

  "Solid" (Prochnyi) food is food which is both nourishing and slow to digest,
which remains in the stomach for a long time, for once your belly is empty
you can no longer do heavy work until you eat again.
  As black rye bread is the main component of the diet, it is important
that the bread should be thick, not light, not doughy, and made well, out
of fresh flour. A worker pays great attention to bread. Good bread is the
most important thing.
  More observations about Russian food are that mushrooms and sorrel may
also be "soured in", like white cabbage. "Pickled cabbage (Parkinson's
`saurkraut') was a universal staple in Great Russia. "Pickled vegetables
may have provided a valuable antiscorbutic. Certainly peasants generally
attributed great importance to the presence of something sour in the diet."
  "For the peasants, something acidic (kislota) is an essential part of
any diet."
  The rural population in Russia in particular relies on having for their
meals regular supplies of pickled cabbage, pickled beetroot, mushrooms,
gherkins, or, in the absence of such soured vegetables, whey or buttermilk
to add to soups made with fresh vegetables. Also the best known Russian
drink, Kvass, may be added to soup, or fermented dough, in order to supply
the acidity that is appreciated for its energy giving qualities.
  Kvass was an essential for preventing infectious diseases and epidemics
also an antidote to scurvy in country regions where hygienic arrangements
were absent. Kvass or quass was also a nutritious drink, however, and
making Kvass was a basic skill acquired that was as important as making
bread, as both were equally important in daily life. Kvass could be made
with barley, rye, wheat, buckwheat or oats, to which fruit juices were added.
Among the fruit Kvasses there could be additions of pears, cherries, lemons,
berries, herbs, apples, etc., whatever could be found in the countryside
and was easily available from the natural environment. 
  Another traditional drink is Kaffir beer, the national beverage of the Bantu
tribes of South Africa. Kaffir beer is characterised by the fermenting of 
previously soured gruel, generally prepared from ground malted and unmalted 
Sorghum. "A great variety of similar beverages is still prepared today by the 
natives throughout Africa from indigenous cereals, and Kaffir beer from 
Southern Africa is quite comparable with `merissa' from the Sudan, `bouza' 
from Ethiopia and `pombe' from East Africa," writes J.P. Van der Walt in 
Kaffircorn Malting and Brewing Studies II. Studies on the Microbiology of 
Kaffir Beer. The Kaffir beer is rich in lactic acid and vitamins such as 
Thiamine, Riboflavin, Nicotinic acid, also in fibre and protein, etc., 
provided the original fermenting process is retained, home brewing guarantees 
high nutritional value.

 Modern Diet Deficient  

  Our present "civilisation diet" which has relied more and more on convenience
foods and luxury foods from supermarkets during past decades is sadly lacking
in enzymes, as fresh vegetables are almost unobtainable to the city dwellers,
as it may take two days for them to be delivered from the country through
the commercial channels.
  Also the contamination of many foods with PCP and PCB has caused many
new outbreaks of "allergy" diseases as well as multiple allergies. Coeliac
disease, caused by malfunction or breakdown of the pancreas gland, is a
frequent and growing complaint now. 
  Dr. A. Vogel, the famous Swiss Nature Doctor, who also produces more than
3,000 homoeopathic medicines in his Bioforce Laboratory, mentions that there
are dozens of Lady's Bedstraw plants and that all of them have the strange
property of coagulating milk, like rennet obtained from calf's stomachs.
This juice in the plant makes it suitable for producing cheeses.
(Lab-Labferment). 
  It is in particular this biological combination, besides other mineral
constituents that are in the Lady's Bedstraw plants, that has an excellent
effect upon the pancreas gland. It is known that the pancreas gland has
a double function. The external secretion excretes enzymes, amylase in
particular. This has the effect in the small intestine of changing carbohydrate
into sugar, i.e. digesting cereals, potatoes or any other starch; it is
this starch that is digested by the enzyme, provided the cereal grains have
been broken down first.
  Hence, if there are problems with the digestion of carbohydrate, if
fermentations and flatulence become a problem in that the transformation
of the starch into a sugar form is not working properly, then Lady's Bedstraw
is the correct treatment in order to stimulate and support the malfunctioning
of the pancreas gland. It ought to be used freshly gathered when blooming
between June and August, otherwise dried as infusion, to make a tea. Two
teaspoons fresh or one teaspoon dried herbs are enough for half a litre.
  Lady's Bedstraw also has an intensely stimulating effect upon the kidneys,
this can be further enhanced by adding Solidago, about 30-50 drops. It is best
drunk in the morning. One will be able to observe that this has a diuretic
effect during the day. Drinking this tea during the afternoon would tend
to disturb the night's rest. Lady's Bedstraw also contains bitter substances
that provide a supporting effect in every cancer therapy.
 
 Anti-cancerous Effect  

  "Whether it is the bitter substances that aid cancer therapies it is
difficult to say," says Dr. Vogel. It has been observed, however, that there
are surprising experiences when Lady's Bedstraw is employed in cancer therapy.
 Mrs. Marie Treben has reported that Lady's Bedstraw may produce surprising
results when used in cancer therapy, as this plant has made a considerable
contribution during external as well as internal applications or
administrations, i.e. during treatment of various cancer tumours, as well
as during treatment of cancer-like skin diseases. "One should, of course,
not merely rely on the effects of one single plant but ought to observe
the principles of holistic therapy when there are serious diseases to be
treated, such as the pancreas gland or cancer," says Dr. Vogel. Nutritional
principles as well as all other healing factors that support, which strengthen
and re-activate the regeneration powers of the body and support it, are
to be considered. "If Lady's Bedstraw was taken as a prophylactic, this too,
would not ignore the many sided good properties of this healing plant, and
could prevent many unnecessary illnesses."
  When foods are fermented they unlock additional nutritional factors that
have health enhancing properties. This is the case also for ancient,
traditional drinks, many of which have been sacrificed to the development
of civilisation and have been forced to make way for more artificial drinks
produced commercially that do not have these prophylactic and nutritious 
properties. Wherever the natural rural life has had to make way for industrial
life with all its disadvantages and commercialisation, the enslaving of 
women into factory work and the displacement of a rural natural rhythm for a 
stress filled life, there the natural raw materials are less easily accessible
and home brewing is displaced by the commercial brewing of traditional 
nutritious drinks.
  Where traditional drinks were based upon a thick gruel that was fermented
into an opaque drink with suspended particles, where this drink acted not
merely as an energy drink but also as a food, supplying many nutriments,
we find that some adulteration or mass-production without basic ingredients
may lead to malnutrition as a natural outcome in the native population.

