<sample>
	<id> F35 </id>
	


	<source> A Country Practice: quality soap  </source>
	


	<note> 2015 words </note>
	  


	<h>1. </h>
	


	<h> How It Began: In General Practice </h>
	

  The town of Burraga will face epidemics, bushfires, floods, visits by
  bikies and exploitation by land developers. The farms around will be attacked
  by disease, the animals savaged by wild dogs, the crops fail in the drought.
  There will be football matches, cricket matches, `Burraga Show', fashion
  parades and the Annual Ball. Romances will form, marriages will break up,
  babies will be born and old people die. Some young people will die too,
  by disease, by accident, by their own hand.
    Our cast will be heavily involved in this cycle of life, with the town
  and with each other.
    The audience will be involved along with them.

                      
	<misc> James Davern's note to In General Practice </misc>
	

By July 1986, when this book appears, 420 episodes of A Country Practice
will have gone to air since it began in 1981. The program is the most popular
drama serial on Australian television, and is seen on nearly a hundred stations
across the country. Its ratings in Sydney and elsewhere are consistently
in the 30s, a figure that indicates in Sydney alone an audience of over
a million people. The marriage in 1983 of two of the central characters,
Vicky and Simon, drew a rating of 45 in Sydney (about one and a half million
people), and then a 46 rating in Brisbane (half a million people) for the
same episode. On the estimate that in 1982 each Sydney rating point was worth
about $2 million to Channel 7 over the year, ACP, `consistently rating over
30 in Sydney' for all of that year, was a valuable product for its host
company.
  ACP receives over a thousand fan letters a week; the one quoted below
is typical.

  My most deliberate and hearty congratulations for a powerful two nights'
  entertainment ... I have been meaning to write to you from the first time
  that I viewed A Country Practice. Last night forced me to. Fan-bloody-tastic.
  The whole production side and scripts, acting and directing is of the highest
  excellence. For the first time whilst watching an Australian show I was moved
  from anger through fright to near tears for the fate of the Matron and
  the outcome of Gus' situation. Brilliance and many more words for this
  man's performance. And also for everyone else in the principal cast ...
  No longer need Australian audiences have their intelligence insulted.
  For this I thank all involved in and with JNP.

  The show has a national fan club. One of its animal characters, Molly
Jones' pig Doris, was a guest of honour at Sydney and Adelaide agricultural
shows, and Simon's pet wombat Fatso has appeared on a children's calendar.
Newspapers and magazines run features on the program - on the cast, sometimes
on the crew, and on what may happen in future episodes. TV current affairs
host, Mike Willesee, produced a documentary feature which was shown in 
prime time to excellent ratings. A record of Vicky's and Simon's wedding
vows went into the Top Twenty.
  ACP is also shown outside Australia. In Britain it is shown on the ITV
network, and in London, playing on Wednesday afternoons, it has healthy
ratings of 16. An English fan writes: `The folk in Country Practice seem
more English than we are.' Today 458 episodes have been sold to Italy. It
is seen in Eire, on West German cable television, on the European satellite
system Sky TV, and in the USA. It is also seen in Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malta
and Hong Kong. James Davern, the executive producer, estimates that ACP's
worldwide audience is probably between five and six million people.
  ACP has become such an institution in Australian TV drama, that it's hard
to remember life before ACP began. Yet in tracing its history, we discover
how much its originality is a negotiation of past histories - of soap opera,
past program successes and failures, past station policies and past work
histories.


	<h> Soap Opera </h>
	

Soap opera, or `women's weepies' began in the 1930s on American radio. The
form was both new and old. The serials were commissioned by radio stations
keen to fill daytime hours with material that would attract audiences, and
therefore advertisers. Large soap powder manufacturers were eager and willing
to pay to reach housewives, and romantic drama, drama of the `heart' and
the `emotions' was the dramatic vehicle chosen. Thus soap opera was born.
  Despite its poor critical reputation - one, incidentally, with which we
would not necessarily agree - soap opera obviously offers its audiences
considerable pleasure. They get to `know' the characters, the kinds of stories,
and issues that will develop. The regular viewer builds up a bank of
information in relation to a serial and the producers can take this for
granted. Thus a soap opera works in terms of an aesthetic shorthand, where
past events are briefly summarised, where a character can be recalled in
a word or sentence and the audience knows what is being alluded to. As one
of the writers on A Country Practice, David Boutland, put it:

  Television isolates people from each other. These characters become their
  friends. A lot of people are a lot happier watching Vicky be Vicky, Simon
  be Simon and predictably Dr Elliott being Dr Elliott, than having to deal
  with real people who are an unknown quantity. It's an easier thing. There's
  certainly something to be said for characters acting the way we know they'll
  act.

At the same time the soap opera, with its cliff-hanging endings, obviously
seeks to develop viewing habits. One episode sets up the need to find out
what happens next. The audience regards the main characters as friends,
and wants to go on meeting them. The satisfaction of curiosity in one episode
and the expectation of pleasure in succeeding ones leads the audience to
watch night after night, from one week to the next. The casual viewer becomes
a regular, and a fan is born.


	<h> The Australian Soap </h>
	

The drama serial, soap opera, has been around in Australian broadcasting
for a very long time. One of the most durable radio examples, The Lawsons,
began on the ABC in 1944 and, changing its title to Blue Hills in 1949,
continued on air until 1976. Like ACP, Blue Hills was set in the country
and also contained an educational edge, although, like The Archers in Britain,
agricultural rather than medical or social. Although Blue Hills had a large
following in the city, the program was broadcast at 1 pm each day, to coincide
with rural audiences' lunch hour, and repeated early in the evening.
  Serial drama has been a feature of Australian television almost since
TV was established in 1956. Until the 1970s there was a good deal of
uncertainty about the audiences and timeslots for soaps. The history of
Australian television serials falls into three phases. The first, part of
an era often called `radio with pictures', was a direct attempt to transfer
the form from radio to television. The first actual serial, Autumn Affair
(1959), was produced by ATN Channel 7 in Sydney as a series of quarter-hour
episodes, intended mainly for women. It went to air each morning, immediately
after a breakfast show. However it had no luck, finding neither a sponsor
nor an audience.
  The second effort was directly instigated by the success of both Granada's
Coronation Street and Associated Television's Crossroads on British commercial
television in the early 1960s. The ABC's Bellbird, which was to run for
ten years, began in 1967. Like Coronation Street, Bellbird emphasised the
social interaction of a group of ordinary people. James Davern, who directed
the pilot episode, described the characters as `normal Australians living
in a country town'. Like Blue Hills, Bellbird was broadcast in quarter-hour
episodes at tea time each week day evening. It was very successful and built
up a solid audience.
  Crossroads had an Australian imitator in ATN 7's Motel. In a setting on
the road between Canberra and Sydney, Motel was directed mainly toward women
at home. It was thought, however, that in due course it might attract a
night time male audience as well; it was shown both at lunchtime and in
a late evening timeslot. Motel, however, failed to attract that larger
audience, and ceased production after more than 150 episodes.
  Australian commercial television drama at this time was dominated by the
Crawford police series. It was only with the 1972 success of Number 96 on
the 0-10 network that the drama serial became a viable programming form.
Number 96 chronicled the bawdy, comic and melodramatic lives of an amorphous
group of people sharing an apartment block in an inner Sydney suburb. Shown
in half-hour episodes five evenings a week in an adult time slot, 8.30 p.m.,
the program was enormously popular for much of its six years on air. Number
96 made the breakthrough. With the single exception of the Grundy
Organization's serial Until Tomorrow (1974/75) all Australian TV serials
produced since then have been designed to capture the large prime time evening
audience. 
  Since the early 1970s the soaps have proliferated: Certain Women, The
Box, The Sullivans, The Young Doctors, Cop Shop, The Restless Years, Prisoner,
Skyways, A Country Practice, Sons and Daughters, Carson's Law and Prime
Time. Other dramatic forms, like the play and the single-episode series,
have almost disappeared from commercial television. But it is important to
distinguish, within this successful group, between those that are strictly
continuous (The Young Doctors, The Sullivans and Sons and Daughters, for
instance) and those which are organised on the principle of the two-episode
block (Cop Shop, A Country Practice and Carson's Law). In the former time
is continuous from one episode to the next. In the latter group, time between
blocks is usually unspecified. This has consequences for showing repeats
of the two kinds of serials. Blocks can be repeated out of strict sequence.
Thus, past blocks, certain highlights of A Country Practice, have played
in the Christmas/New Year non-rating season. Such programming is not possible
with A Country Practice's `twin', the continuous serial, Sons and Daughters,
produced in Channel 7 studios in Sydney across the corridor from ACP.
  While the success rate in the last ten years has been striking, the soap
opera is not invariably successful. There has been a string of rating
casualties: Arcade, Punishment, Holiday Island, Taurus Rising, Waterloo
Station, Kings and Starting Out. Which means that when James Davern in 1979
put papers in his typewriter to start work on what would ultimately become
A Country Practice he had no way of knowing whether his ideas would reach
production, or whether the program would succeed in finding an audience.


	<h> Another Soap </h>
	

Davern had had a long and varied career in television. Beginning as an engineer
with ABC radio in Melbourne in the early 1950s, he had become a pool director
in television. In that capacity he directed the pilot episode of Bellbird
in 1966. Subsequently on Bellbird, over the next seven years or so, he
was a script writer, script editor, director, producer and executive producer.
At the same time Davern wrote scripts for the Crawford police dramas and
it was on one such script that he met Lynn Bayonas, then a script editor
on Homicide. Subsequently their paths crossed again. Lynn Bayonas moved
to the ABC,and they worked together on Rush as script editor and producer.
  Davern came to Sydney as head of ABC TV Drama in 1975, and remained in
that position until he resigned in 1977. He did not immediately sever his
links with the ABC. JNP, a company he had formed, was commissioned to produce
scripts for the ABC series, Patrol Boat; Davern wrote six of its first 13
episodes and acted as script editor on the other seven. Meanwhile, Lynn
Bayonas had moved to Sydney where she worked for the ABC for three years
before going freelance as a writer. She wrote for The Box, Skyways and Holiday
Island and was `thinking of cutting my throat' after that experience when
Davern approached her with the outline of what was to become A Country
Practice.


</sample>
