Demystifying The Museum Donald Horne The Language of Museums  

I hope you will forgive me if I begin with some theoretical speculation. I am doing this to make sense of what follows. The basic idea I should like to put forward is that, as humans, we create 'realities' of various kinds which enable us to think and act. We simplify existence. We construct, if you like, hypothetical models, which  become 'reality' for us. Existence itself is so diverse that there is no general agreement about what is going on, but in any particular society there are likely to be particular prevailing agreements about 'reality'. So, in a way, one can speak of the 'language' of a society and see that 'language' expressed not only in words, and visual images, but in institutions, in gestures, in clothes, in buildings, in food and in a great number of other ways, including museums, (which have been described as the cathedrals of modern society).

As  have suggested in my book, The Public Culture, in modern industrial societies one might speak of a 'public culture', of a kind that didn't exist in earlier societies. This 'public culture' purports to be 'the national life'. One might see it connected with affairs of state and ceremonies of civil religion; in the activities and values of the great bureaucracies of government, of business and of trade unions; in public propaganda (including, in capitalist societies, advertising), in what we describe as 'the news', in the entertainment, education and culture industries, in sport and tourism, in public art and architecture, in the way we spend our leisure, even in shopping. And in museums.

It is from this perspective - their place in a public culture - that we might look at museums, because museums also have, as it were, a 'language'. Museums are 'saying' something to us ('saying' some things, not 'saying' other things) and it is important to ask what is is that the museums are 'saying'.

In raising such a question I am not just talking about the intentions of the people who run museums, but about the way museums actually operate, the objective consequences of their existence, what they can actually mean to us. I will give a few examples.

The first is that of the art museum. If you ask people running an art museum what they think they are doing they are likely to give two kinds of answer. One will be connected with the storage and conservation of art objects; the other will be an educational objective. But we also know from surveys that one of the 'functions' (objective consequences) of art museums has also been to put the ordinary people in their place - to make them realise that they know nothing about art. Surveys have been done in the past which suggested that the majority of working class people who went to an art museum, could come away with a principal impression of it as a cathedral. I am not suggesting this is always or even usually the effect of art museums. One can recognise, for example, that the use of special exhibitions is one way of overcoming the awesomeness of an art museum. But often when people go to an art museum they see a whole lot of pictures put out like a child's stamp collection, with no coherent meaning - without any of the intellectual coherence, for example, that might be found in a book. And this can assist them in believing that they 'know nothing about art'.

Also worth noting is the way art museums can give an impression of 'art' that is a historical. They can sometimes lump together all kinds of products, some of which were produced by people who saw them as 'art' and others by people who didn't know the concept of  'art' in its present meaning. It has only been in modern industrial societies, with their secularism and their distinction between art and life, that the very idea of 'art' as we know it has been developed, yet one can go into, say, the first gallery of the Australian National Gallery and see lumped together in that room objects all of which are described as 'art', yet most of which, when they were first produced, were not produced as 'art' at all. An African mask, which was made for special ritual purposes, is presented as exactly the same kind of thing as a Monet water lilies study, which was produced for hanging in a museum. So another 'function' of a museum can be to project an idea of a universally acknowledged 'art' - when in fact there has been no such thing.

Another example comes from technology museums. The people who run technology museums can imagine they are giving people information about machinery, about industry, about science. But since machines do not reproduce themselves such museums must also be (whether this is intended or not) social history museums. Yet the people running them may not face up to this responsibility. Take the Science Museum in London, one of the world's greatest collections of technological devices. As soon as you walk into it you see a splendid display of steam engines arranged down the middle of the first hall that would do credit to a sculptures gallery and from this you may get the impression that somehow or other the Industrial Revolution began with steam engines - that steam engines are what most mattered about the Industrial Revolution - and as if to compound this impression, there not far away, is also the workshop of James Watt, presented as the great pioneer of the steam engine, and therefore the Industrial Revolution. There it is, the exact workshop, with five thousand pieces in it, as it was the very day Watt died. Back into your head may even come the schooldays legend of how Watt, the great genius, sat in the kitchen, watching the kettle boil and then invented the Industrial Revolution, the importance of steam engines is just one factor among many others. There is no general account of the Industrial Revolution in the Science Museum, but a particular account is inferred by the selection and arrangement of objects. Upstairs are some of the important factory machines connected with the Industrial Revolution, but even these are not given any social meaning. You learn nothing about the way in which people were already being disciplined to work in factories and in other institutions (arguably one of the important preconditions of the Industrial Revolution); nor do you learn anything about the agricultural revolution, nor about the capital accumulations from the slave trade and other profitable businesses, nor about the secularisation of society, nor about the development of banking nor about any of the other factors also seen as connected with the story of the Industrial Revolution. So if you go into the Science Museum what it is likely to 'say' to you is that technology means machines reproducing machines; one steam engine begat another steam engine, which begat another steam engine, until finally some other machine by some type of mutation begat electricity - as if the machines simply had an internal relationship with each other, reproducing each other without any human agency. This pure emphasis on technology culminates in a space museum (whether it's in Moscow or Washington) in which, with a great sense of technological triumphalism, it looks as if machines now own the universe.

A second last example: In the Scandinavian countries in particular, but also in many other places, there are great open air 'folk museums' put together at the time when the peasantry was being destroyed, taken from all kinds of regions and lumped together in typically discordant museum fashion. These are intended to recall peasant life for us, yet many ordinary middle-class persons going to them might not so much consider what peasant life was like, as look for new ideas for redecorating their own converted cottages. The open air museums of Scandinavia became, above all, the apotheosis of the wooden beam, which for several generations of Europeans has meant naturalness, sincerity and good taste.

A last example: in turning against some of the rigid discipline of the earlier museums we now have the button-pushing museum. In itself, this can seem an idea founded on very sound principles. But there is, of course, always the difficulty that in the 'fun museum', the only thing the visitor might remember is the 'fun' itself. A visit to a museum becomes an exercise in pushing buttons with the illusion, perhaps, that, somehow, by doing this, one gets the machines under control.

 The 'Magic' of  Museums  

Not only is it necessary to recognise that museums exist in particular kinds of society and that they have 'languages' which can be examined in terms of what appear to be prevailing 'realities' in these societies; we might also recognise that part of the significance of museums comes from what might be described as their 'magic'. For example, just as medieval pilgrims went to participate in the magic of holy relics in cathedrals some of the objects we see in museums are now secular relics, with an aura of scarcity, costliness and, in particular, 'authenticity'.

One of the established forms of this 'magic' comes from what Irving Goffman has described as the ceremonial agenda of obligatory rites. We tend to go to some museums partly because they are on a kind of life agenda: they are something we must go and pay our respects to: they are part of a ceremonial order that has been laid down for us. Going to museums becomes part of growing up. Again a comparison with a cathedral is relevant. Just as in the Middle Ages people might have been taken to a cathedral and shown those comic strip stories up in the windows, or in the mosaics, or in the carvings, describing important events and ideas, people can now be taken to a museum as part of the revelation of life's mysteries.

I certainly remember this from my own experience. I can remember periodic trips to museums in Sydney which acted as refresher courses in what it might mean to be human. When we went to the Art Gallery, being a human being meant partly a concern with 'the bush' and its landscapes, but more exactly, as I remember it, it was a concern for displaying reverence for nineteenth century academic art (since the Art Gallery at that stage, being a very modern gallery, was stocked with it). Above all my enormous respect for the Art Gallery came because at our house we had the four fat volumes of The Story of the British Nation, illustrated by all of the famous academy history-paintings of British history, and two of these, 'Rorke's Drift' and 'Chaucer at the Court of Edward III', were in the NSW Art Gallery. I had this feeling that there must be something important about Sydney; it had 'Rorke's Drift' and 'Chaucer at the Court of Edward III'.

We would also go to the Australian Museum. This seemed a reminder of the field of knowledge with which I was familiar at school - one studies bones and rocks and zoological classifications and so forth. There it was - knowledge, laid out for inspection in appropriate categories, like an encyclopedia (and I had as much respect for Cassell's Children's Book of Knowledge as I did for The Story of the British Nation).  What the Museum of Applied Arts and Sciences (the old one, of course) really told me was that technology had finished: the whole museum seemed so out-of-date. Technology  was something that had existed once: perhaps it reached its apex in the Strasburg Clock. However the most significant visit on our family's ceremonial agenda of obligatory rites was to the war museum (at that period housed in Sydney). When my father, who had been a digger in the Great War, would take me to the war museum, I had a real sense of meaning. 

