Genetic engineering: the state of the art  

It is only 43 years since Dr Oswald Avery and his colleagues at Rockefeller
University in New York showed that DNA had some role in bacterial genetics
and heredity.

At the time it seemed a fairly unremarkable discovery, but in the intervening
years our knowledge about the pivotal role of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) in the 
development of all organisms has accelerated relentlessly.
  To achieve the current understanding, scientists had to develop techniques
for manipulating DNA. In 1958 the first enzyme capable of the test-tube
synthesis of DNA was isolated, and in 1967 the enzyme DNA-ligase, capable
of joining two DNA chains, was discovered. These 'tools' were soon complemented
as scientists isolated the first of the 'restriction' enzymes that cut
the DNA chain at specific points.
  With this battery of enzymes it was only a matter of time before a bit
of cutting and stitching and tampering with the genetic code occurred and,
in 1973, Dr Herbert Boyer, Dr Stanley Cohen, and collaborators at Stanford
University and the University of California reported that they had been
able to isolate, and artificially recombine, DNA from one strain of that
workhorse of modern molecular biology Escherichia coli and then transfer it
into another strain.
  This opened up the possibility of breaching the species barrier and
constructing completely new organisms that would never have existed without
the intervention of man and his test-tubes. And soon it came about, with
E. coli being the recipient of a range of plant, animal, and viral genes.
The science of genetic engineering had been born.
  Announcing the birth, the world's media trumpeted to a bewildered public
all the possibilities inherent in the miraculous new technology: super-plants,
super-cows, a cure for cancer, vast riches. Very little was left to the
imagination.
  So far the miracle hasn't eventuated. While some animal products have
entered the market-place, only one genetically engineered product with a
significant impact on human welfare has come onto the market: human insulin,
which has an unusual amino acid composition that makes it easy to produce
(see the box). Other proteins - and proteins are the major concern of genetic
engineers - have more complex structures that are not so amenable to
manipulation. 
  The molecular biology of DNA and the way the proteins it codes for are
synthesised and packaged within organisms have proved more complicated than
those early cuts and stitches in the genetic code suggested. Proteins often
need a lot of follow-up work after the DNA specifies their production. They
may need to be trimmed to the right size, or their internal structure tightened
up by the addition of, for example, a sugar molecule; in some cases they
then have to be correctly packaged and presented to the outside world.
  Scientists within CSIRO have been actively exploring the potential of
genetic engineering, and some of their experiences provide insights into
the sorts of problems that have to date stymied the full development of
the new technology. The problems they have encountered emphasise the complexity
of genetic expression and reveal how a better understanding and very clever
manipulation of the system will be necessary if molecular biology is ever
to reach its full commercial potential in, for example, vaccine production.

 Developing a vaccine  

Many bacterial and viral pathogens have a protein that they use to attach
themselves to the cell of the organism they infect. This protein meshes
with a receptor on the host cell and, after attachment, the pathogen brings
into operation a fresh battery of proteins - enzymes - that complete the
penetration of the cell and produce the full-blown disease.
  Attachment is of fundamental importance to the pathogen's colonisation
of the host and continuing survival, but in the never-ending battle between
host and pathogen this is often thwarted by the activities of the host's
immune system.
  Circulating white blood cells focus on molecules on the surface of the
pathogen, including the attachment protein (immunologists call these molecules
antigens), and this leads to the host synthesising a matching protein (or
antibody) that, just like the receptor on a vulnerable cell, binds to the
invading protein, effectively immobilising the pathogen. Soon after, the
invader is devoured by the scavenging cells that form another part of the
immune system's armoury.
  Vaccination is a way of accelerating the host-pathogen interplay. Killed or
attenuated pathogens, incapable of causing a full-blown infection, are introduced 
into the potential host. The host's immune system responds as if it has been 
assaulted by the fully infectious pathogen and produces antibodies, which 
continue circulating in the body, protecting the host from any fresh challenge by 
the pathogen.
  The production of vaccines is a sophisticated process with high standards
that need to be maintained: major public health problems have arisen when
people were dosed with `killed' pathogens that still retained their
pathogenicity. In addition, the process is often difficult and/or expensive.
For example, production of the influenza vaccine involves growing the virus
in fertilised hen's eggs. Many of these problems could quickly be overcome
if the pathogen DNA (or the related ribonucleicacid, RNA) coding for the attachment
protein, or other relevant antigens, could be isolated and then synthesised
in a friendly bacterium.
  A new generation of vaccines is being developed for a wide range of human
and animal diseases, and one that has reached a fairly advanced stage of
development is for footrot - a crippling, debilitating disease of sheep
caused by the bacterium bacteroides nodosus. A conventional vaccine against 
footrot is available, but its production and quality are beset by the sorts of 
problems mentioned above, and its high cost - about 80 cents a dose, with two 
doses being necessary - deters graziers from using it.

 Fighting footrot  

Dr David Stewart of the CSIRO Division of Animal Health, Dr John Mattick,
Dr Brian Dalrymple, and Ms Margaret Bills, of the CSIRO Division of Molecular
Biology, and Dr Tom Elleman, Dr Neil McKern, and Mr Peter Hoyne, of the
CSIRO Division of Protein Chemistry, along with Ms Beau Anderson and Professor
John Egerton, of the Faculty of Veterinary Science at the University of
Sydney, have made considerable progress in developing a new footrot vaccine
through the use of recombinant-DNA technology.
  Dr Stewart and his colleagues at the Division of Animal Health showed
that the important footrot protein occurs in the fine hair-like filaments
covering the surface of the B. nodosus cell. Although the exact function
of these `hairs', termed fimbriae, in the footrot organism is uncertain,
it seems likely that they are involved in attachment to, or colonisation
of, the tissues of the hoof by the bacterium. Once attached, the invader
then produces an array of enzymes that break down the protein in hoof tissues
and produce the footrot syndrome.
  The fimbrial proteins are built up from protein sub-units, and their
production through genetic engineering could simplify vaccine production.
The first step in the construction of such a vaccine is the isolation of
the genes responsible for the fimbrial protein and its assembly.
  The scientists achieved this by breaking up the B. nodosus DNA with a
restriction enzyme and then placing individual fragments into a plasmid
- a short piece of bacterial DNA - that also contained a gene coding for
antibiotic resistance. After these `recombinant' DNA molecules were transferred
into E. coli, they cultured the bacteria on a medium amended with antibiotic.
  A combination of genetic tricks enabled the scientists to determine which
bacterial colonies (or clones) contained the B. nodosus DNA; and to find
out which ones contained the fimbrial sub-unit gene, the team challenged
the bacteria with antibodies against the fimbrial protein. Out of the two
thousand clones prepared, eight were found to be producing the sub-unit.
  But it's not so simple as that: while these genetically engineered E.
coli could be induced to produce copious quantities of the fimbrial protein
sub-unit, no mature fimbriae were formed. A closer look at individual bacteria
revealed why: the sub-unit protein was embedded in the cell membrane and
had gone no further. The group then tried the same trick with a strain
of E. coli that possesses fimbriae but, again, mature fimbriae refused to
form.
  From other studies on the fimbriated E. coli, the Australian group knew
that a cluster of five or six genes is involved in the construction of
fimbriae. One codes for the fimbrial sub-unit, another for a larger protein
that anchors the fimbriae to the cell wall, and the remainder are apparently
involved in the assembly of the mature fimbriae.
  A similar assembly system probably operates in B. nodosus; presumably
the other genes involved were not transferred to E. coli along with the
sub-unit protein gene and this may explain their failure to produce typical
fimbriae. However, attempts to transfer a larger party of the B. nodosus
genome, or to use E. coli's fimbrial assembly genes, have thus far provided
no solution.
  Evidently there is a basic incompatibility between the fimbrial systems
of these two bacteria. However, when Dr McKern sequenced the B. nodosus
protein sub-unit it became clear that this had a great many similarities
with those occurring in the fimbriae of Neisseria gonorrhoeae (one of the
venereal disease organisms), Moraxella bovis (the cause of pink eye in
cattle), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (a common saprophyte.)
  P. aeruginosa, in particular, is easy to grow and its genetics are well
understood. More importantly its fimbrial assembly machinery is compatible
with that of B. nodosus because, when the scientists transferred the footrot
bacterium's protein sub-unit genes into it, the new host produced bulk
quantities of intact mature B. nodosus fimbriae. A patent application has
been lodged for this process and preliminary tests on the fimbriae suggest
that they are at least as good as the conventionally produced vaccine. And,
because P. aeruginosa is easier to grow than the footrot bacterium, the
protein yield is much higher, suggesting that production may be much simpler.
  At present the footrot vaccine is being put through further trials involving
the various CSIRO Divisions and the University of Sydney, and an agreement
between CSIRO and two animal health companies for its commercial production
is being negotiated. There are still some technical problems to be overcome
- one, a rather common complaint in genetic engineering, is that the
recombinant bacteria tend to be unstable in culture - but if all goes well
Australian graziers should be able to make use of one of the first genetically
engineered vaccines in the near future.

 Engineering plants and animals  

Bacteria have made such an enormous contribution to the science of molecular
biology because of their simplicity. As members of the group of organisms
known as prokaryotes, they lack a membrane-bound nucleus where the DNA is
found. The great bulk of the bacterial DNA occurs in a single long chromosome
floating around the cell's interior; as such, it is easily accessible compared
with the DNA found in the eukaryotic organisms - plants and animals - that
have a nucleus.
  The eukaryotic cells of plants and animals contain much more DNA, packaged
away in the nucleus. Any introduced foreign DNA has to traverse the cell
membrane (and with plants a substantial cellulose cell wall before the
membrane) and then the nuclear membrane, before it can possibly be integrated
into the host genome. Such a tortuous path presents problems to biologists
attempting to manipulate the genetics of plants and animals.
  Large numbers of bacteria can easily be grown from a single cell using
only relatively simple media containing carbon and nitrogen sources, some
minerals, and possibly some growth factors such as the B-group vitamins;
but plant and animal cells are much more demanding and this creates further
complications.
  Individual eukaryotic cells are difficult to manipulate and they demand
extra growth factors, such as those found in blood serum or an array of
hormones, if they are ever to grow in culture. Even then they are still very
refractory.
  For example, members of the cereal family - including the rice, maize,
and wheat that provide the bulk of the world's calories - refuse to form
complete plantlets, capable of growing on in the wider world after removal
from their test-tube residence.

