<sample>
	<id> F39 </id>
	


	<source> Australian Geographic - January 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2000 words </note>
	


	<h> Living in the Pilbara </h>
	


	<h> When the earth moves, so does the population </h>
	


	<bl> By Phil Jarratt </bl>
	

  WHEN my father left the Pilbara for the last time, 45 years ago, he wasn't
leaving much behind. Just a long, long jetty, which was the pride of his
town, a failed butcher shop, a few good friends and three streets of slap-up
huts which had been knocked down by a blow and slapped up again, all in the
space of a decade and a half.
  When Hitler marched on Poland, my dad and his mates marched - well, drove
- on Perth, covering the 1200 corrugated dirt kilometres in just 26 hours
in my father's '34 Chevy. They had the world in front of them and the
rock-hard, heartbreak dust of the Pilbara behind them, and in those days
there was a reason to be cheerful at every milepost south.
  In the early part of this century the north-west of our country was as
inhospitable as it was in 1688 when William Dampier had noted sourly on
disembarkation at Shark Bay:
  &quot;The land is of a dry sandy soil, destitute of water, except you make
Wells ... the Inhabitants of this Country are the Miserablest People in
the world.&quot;
  It was a place where men came to make fortunes and then got the hell out.
It was not a place that inspired new beginnings and yet many of those lured
by its mineral potential stayed on - more often out of financial necessity
than desire. My grandfather, Walter Oswald Jarratt, was one who stayed.
Lured from the Victorian farmlands by the prospect of riches, he worked
in the huge Whim Creek copper mine at the turn of the century and stayed
on to watch it become the biggest and most profitable in the Southern
Hemisphere. 
  When its German owners were interned during World War I, however, the
mine fell on hard times and my grandfather was retrenched. In 1916, the
year my father was born, Walter Oswald was hustling a buck the best way
he could, odd-jobbing around the big stations of the North West, hunting
camels and sinking fence posts. But the work became scarce in the 1920s
and, with a wife and four children to support, my grandfather drifted south
in search of new opportunities.
  In 1925, he heard about the exciting developments at the town of Onslow
at the mouth of the Ashburton River. A major jetty was under construction
at nearby Beadon Point and the entire town of some 150 residents was to
be relocated. There were construction jobs aplenty, so Walter Oswald loaded
his family and all his worldly goods into the back of his Willys Overland,
threw a tarp over the perishables and hit the dusty track.
  The new town of Onslow was nothing more than a half-finished hotel and
some hastily-built shacks dotted along the beachfront between the jetty and
the creek, but he was able to rent two rooms from the mailman and the family
established itself amidst the sand and the sawdust. By the time the
construction work was finished the Jarratts had come to regard Onslow as
home. Searching for a permanent niche, Walter Oswald returned to his original
trade and opened a butcher shop. He supplied meat to the townsfolk and visiting
pearlers, whose luggers made use of the new jetty at the southernmost point
of their sweeps out of Broome.
  When Walter Oswald died unexpectedly in 1931, my father left school and
donned the apron. His three sisters took turns behind the counter and their
mother, Jesse, smartly acquainted herself with the noble art of bookkeeping.
But my father was not cut out for cutting up carcasses. At night in his
bachelor pad near the Beadon Hotel he studied the radio operators' manual
and dreamed of a life at sea in the radio room of a grand ship, far away
from the choking dust of the Pilbara and the depressing saltpans of the
Ashburton.
  Among my earliest memories are faded photographs of a great twisting jetty
- the pride of Onslow - and the homely old Beadon Hotel with its vast
verandahs, the luggers in port and the fine-chiselled features of the Malays
and Japanese who manned the pearl-diving bells. Accompanying these photos
was a wealth of bedtime stories about the characters of the old North West
and the harsh, honest lives they endured.
  The Pilbara seemed to me then such a romantic last frontier, full of the
sights and sensations a city boy could never know. By the time I left school,
the Pilbara had come to mean something quite different. It was the heart
of the fabulous mining boom, wherein raced the pulse of the State of Excitement
in those heady days of the late 1960s. It was big red mountains of iron
ore, the deafening roar of heavy machinery and a place where towns sprang
up out of the desert almost overnight. It was, we were told, Australia's
future, but it was Newman and Tom Price, not Cossack or Roebourne, and
my father was the only person who ever spoke of Onslow.


	<h> ENTER AN ARMY OF MEN AND MACHINES </h>
	

  Seen from the air, the new towns of the Pilbara look like the crosshatching
on an artist's unfinished landscape. They are orderly, like tiny pieces
of Canberra hurled across the map. They are green on a canvas of brown,
the result of years of hard work with the watering can.
  On closer inspection the towns are uniformly neat (`Tom Price is a tidy
town' proclaims the sign) and seemingly soulless. Shopping centres point
inwards, as though ashamed of their enterprise, and pubs are brick cells
attached to drive-in bottle shops. The rows of houses remind me, as do those
of the Woden and Belconnen valleys and the new suburbs of Darwin, of nothing 
so much as the facades of sweet-smelling suburbia knocked up on Hollywood
back-lots for the filming of situation comedies - so normal they become
surreal. It is as if the building code was devised by an automaton.
  In stark contrast to the orderly streets is the backdrop of spinifex and
wild mountain ranges. From the Tropic of Capricorn north to the edge of
the Great Sandy Desert, there is not a Pilbara township out of sight of
the great prehistoric escarpments of the Hamersley and Chichester Ranges.
Over 2000 million years old, these mountains are scarred with fault lines
and lava flows, and give way to deep and terrifying gorges. It is dramatic
country in every way, but no less dramatic has been its development over
the past two decades.
  The mineral wealth of the Pilbara has been known and exploited for almost
a century, but the booms in gold, copper, manganese, tin, lead and silver
have come and gone, leaving ghost towns and shattered dreams in their wake.
Since 1960, however, when the then Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies repealed
the embargo on the export of iron ore, that metal has ruled the region.
Getting it out of the ground and onto huge ships has become the lifeblood of
the Pilbara's growing population. 
  At the 1961 census there were 4000 residents in the four shires of the
Pilbara; by 1981 the population was almost 50,000, and one company alone
- the giant Hamersley Iron - had invested more than $1.2 billion in plants,
ports, railways and company town dormitories for the workforce. Its mining
operation had become so immense that each day nine, mile-long ore trains
hauled more than 150,000 tonnes of iron ore from the mines at Tom Price
and Paraburdoo to the port of Dampier, where a daily ore carrier was completely
loaded and sent on its way to Japan.
  The mind-boggling enormity of Hamersley Iron's development is dwarfed,
however, by the broader consideration of what remains untouched: some
200 billion tonnes of high-grade (68 per cent or better) iron ore, by one
prospector's estimation.
  &quot;A hell of a bloody lot!&quot; according to Lang Hancock, the rogue bull of
the Pilbara. Since his discovery of the Tom Price deposits in 1952, Hancock
has fuelled his vision of the Pilbara becoming the `Ruhr of South-East Asia'
with the $30,000 a day he receives in prospector's royalties from Hamersley
Iron.
  Hancock, now 76 and without a pilot's license since a heart bypass operation,
claims to have found the ore deposits as he flew through a gorge to avoid
low cloud on a trip to Perth. He later returned to the spot in a jeep and
staked a claim. But he did not go public with his high-grade find until
the iron embargo was lifted. He then set about finding a backer who could
finance such a giant undertaking. In 1962, Hamersley Iron was born out
of an alliance between the British-based Conzinc Riotinto and the American
Kaiser Steel.
  Two years later the company signed contracts with seven major Japanese
steel mills and, in 1966, operations began at Tom Price. Into the heat and
dust of the Pilbara came an army of men and machines.


	<h> DESERT SUBURBIA </h>
	

  In Paraburdoo on a Sunday night, the hotel (another brick cell) closes
at 7 o'clock, but visitors are welcome at the Demons Australian Rules Football
Club, a shed on the edge of town past the drive-in movies.
  Like all male-dominated mining towns, Paraburdoo is mad about sport and,
like all sports-loving miners, the men of Paraburdoo have powerful thirsts.
Thus in the Demons on a Sunday night, after a big weekend of footie, golf,
archery and tennis, it is perhaps understandable if the last-drinks bell
is roundly ignored and the members and guests continue to slake their thirsts
with Emu Bitter. A dozen or so of the town's 344 single men, cleanshaven
but tough in singlets and shorts, remain in the bar. The conversation is
about the need to get involved in as many diversions as possible and the
need to get out of town - to Perth or to Asia - as often as possible.
  &quot;I save up and go to Thailand,&quot; says a miner named Andy. &quot;Not just for
the women either. I go rafting up near Chiang Mai. That's about as far away
from mining as you can get.&quot;
  But even in the very middle of a company town a man can lose himself
in leisure.  For this reason Paraburdoo, with fewer than 2500 residents,
boasts 29 sporting clubs - including tae kwon do, pistols, darts, dog
breeding, speedway and the Hash House Harriers - and 13 service clubs, including
an amateur repertory company.
  The town's facilities, built by Hamersley Iron little more than a decade
ago, are superb, although some, such as the 18-hole golf course, have to
be viewed within the context of the generally brutish environment.
  &quot;Iron ore fairways and sand greens,&quot; said club champion Bob Pepper,
delicately chipping onto the oiled green, where the ball came to an abrupt
halt.  &quot;We tee off on rubber pads and generally don't have any problems
on the fairway, unless you hit a chunk of ore and ricochet into the scrub.
It's these sand greens that are a bastard to play. We mix oil into the sand
to make it stick together, but you really can't putt on it. We've got an
Astroturf green on order and I can't wait until we've got 18 of them.&quot;
  Pepper, a 10-handicapper who drives truckloads of ore from the open face
to the crusher for seven hours each evening, plays nine holes every morning
and 18 on Sunday afternoons. He loves his golf, even on a track of iron.
  &quot;It's the only thing that keeps me sane,&quot; he said with a grin.
  The mine, tucked behind the hills just a few kilometres out of town, directly
employs more than two-thirds of the population. The rest of the workforce
looks after the needs of the miners. In other words, despite a process which
is quaintly called 'normalisation', if you haven't sold your soul to Hamersley
Iron you don't belong in Paraburdoo.
 

</sample>
