Folk flower tonics by Roy Victor Love, Kuraby, Qld.  

Last issue we looked at how the tonics worked, converting flowers into tonics,
making personal mixtures and included instructions and guidelines for making
up and dispensing the folk flower tonics.

 Folk Flower Tonics BANKSIA, Banksia integrifolia (boiling method)  
The lemon coloured cylindrical shaped flowers of this native occur all year
round, but more often during autumn or late winter. The seeds are shed soon
after maturity, unlike other banksias which retain their seed until the
death of the plant. The Banksia remedy is for a feeling of insecurity or
fear of the future, also a slightly wrong approach to life.

 BLUE BILLY GOAT WEED, Ageratum houstenianum (sun method)  
The prolific blue pom-pom flower is attractive to some people and not to
others. This plant grows wild in many gardens as a weed. It has been effective
in cases of loneliness, isolation and introversion. Key words - `lost and
lonely'.

 BLUE PIMPERNEL, Anagallis arvensis (caerulea) (sun method)  
This plant is poisonous and looks like chick weed. It has a pretty little blue
flower and grows in the cooler mountain regions. Only the flower is used,
which is not poisonous and is attached to the plant with a very fine stem.
For purity of thought and wisdom; when we know we should rise above `angry
feelings' even though there may be justification for

 BLACK-EYED SUSAN, Thunbergia alata (sun method)  
A dainty flower with yellow petals and a `black eye' in the centre, it secretes
a sweet sap which attracts ants. This creeper has also been called `Bright
Eyes'. This tonic has been helpful in treating a despondency due to lack
of direction in life. For the person who lacks perception and cannot see
the real functioning of things - he or she cannot see the wood for the trees.
`Bright Eyes' is for insight.

 BROWN KNAPWEED, Centaurea jacea (sun method)  
A pink-mauve flower atop a long stem. The leaves are long and narrow. We
found this plant growing wild in black soil but it is not a native of
Australia. For a complete lack of confidence, for people who are too influenced
in times of trouble by other people's criticism of their actions, both past
and present. This remedy helps a person to again take charge of their life
and decisions.

 CREEPING LANTANA, Lantana motevidensis (sun method)  
This creeper has a purple flower, similar to that of the lantana bush. It
grows over fences, ground or shrubs, and is frequently used in gardens and
landscaping. This tonic is for thoughts that trouble and preoccupy you before
or after friction or conflict with someone, irrespective of who is in
the right. It is also for hate and allied thoughts - it promotes love.

 CREPE MYRTLE, Lagerstroemia indica (boiling method)  
This shrub bears profuse soft, crinkly flowers which weigh the limbs down.
The variety we potentised is of a soft pink colour. This remedy is for
disillusionment or disappointment, if one expects people to feel the same
about certain subjects or aspects as oneself. This will help to bring about
tolerence of other people's attitudes and priorities.

 DAY LILY, Hemerocallis lilioasphodelus (sun method)  
The variety potentised has individual flowers on strong stems above tall,
grassy foliage. When faced with seemingly insurmountable problems or emotional
worries, this remedy will allow you to take one day at a time, to break down the 
large problem into smaller manageable ones.

 GOLDEN WREATH WATTLE, Acacia saligna (sun method)  
This native has pom-pom flowers and long narrow leaves. The Golden Wreath
Wattle blooms in August or September. This is for people who are worn-out
or weak during spring and early summer.

 IVORY CURL FLOWER, Buckinghamia celsissima (sun method)  
Bushy evergreen native shrub with masses of sweet-smelling cream flowers
in summer. This remedy is for the elusive fear that one cannot fight because
its source cannot be pinpointed. It can be for a spiritual fear of something
trying to tear one down; or for the nameless terrors than can come upon
an individual for no particular reason.

 MOONLIGHT CACTUS, Hylocereus undatus (sun method)  
`The Ray of Light' is a big beautiful cactus which blooms at night in late
summer. This remedy is for the person who is searching for light in the
darkness, and will help them to see which way to go, and to reason out their
problems.

 MORTON BAY CYPRESS/BRIBIE PINE, Callitris columellaris (boiling method)  
This large tree is a native of the Morton Bay area and is laden with pollen
when flowering. It is a soothing remedy for helping to calm a restless, uneasy
feeling, and has been used for emergencies and in panic situations.

 MOSCHOSMA, Iboza riparia (sun method)  
A deciduous shrub with soft, grey green foliage, bearing small feathery
flowers in autumn or winter. When crushed the leaves have a strong smell.
For tiredness through being drained by people who need love and understanding.
This remedy is invaluable for those people working with patients, eg. social
workers, practitioners, healers, who give a lot of themselves, and can
therefore become very depleted.

 NASTURTIUM, Tropaeolum majus (sun method)  
This ground cover plant is commonly found in gardens and has rounded leaves and red 
or yellow flowers. This is a soothing remedy for tired people who seem to
have small reserves of energy which are often and easily depleted.

 PINK PERIWINKLE, Catharanthus roseus  
This appears similar to the pie-eyed periwinkle, but the leaves are bright
pink. This is for people who need love, attention or pampering. They feel
they have missed out on their share of recognition for their efforts. They
feel they deserve more attention. In children this may appear as aggression.

 PINK SHAMROCK, Oxalis latifolia (sun method)  
A small plant, this garden weed is very prolific under shady trees. It has
a tri-lobed leaf like clover, but much bigger, on a straight stalk of up
to 10 to 20 cm. The flower is mauve-pink. It is for acceptance of, or
adjustment to, change.

 PIE-EYED PERIWINKLE, Catharanthus roseus (sun method)  
This flower has five plain white petals on a plant which grows to 60 cm high.
The centre of the flower is pink, thus `pie-eyed'. A remedy for the suppressed
spirit which is trying to give expression but cannot because it feels trapped
in a situation. This feeling can lead to depression and hopelessness because
creative ability is supressedPRIMULA, Primula obconica (sun method)  
A garden plant with small pink and mauve flowers. This remedy has been helpful
for shock eg. accidents, bad news.

 PURPLE GINGER, Dichorisandra thyrsiflora (sun method)  
This garden plant has long leaves and beautiful purple flowers growing in
clusters on an upright stem. This tonic helps those who have been through
a difficult time gather their thoughts and compose themselves. It eases
the accompanying mental exhaustion, and may be needed after another remedy
or series of remedies has helped the patient.

 QUEEN OF THE NIGHT CACTUS, Epiphyllum sp. (sun method)  
This beatiful bloom looks almost the same as Moonlight Cactus. For the person
who has made progress but is in danger of slipping back, and who needs
strengthening to move on. They may have overcome an illness or crisis, but
their health is still hanging on a fine thread.

 SENSITIVE BUSH, Mimosa pudica  
A ground creeper with small leaflets which close when disturbed. It has
small, fluffy, pale pink flowers. The nature of this plant seems to point
to the type of person who closes off to the outside world; loneliness, and
to some extent shyness.

 SMART WEED (PERSICARIA), Polygonum Lathifolium (sun method)  
When I applied to have this flower and plant identified, Smart Weed was
the name that the government botanist gave to it. However, I have since seen
a colour sketch of it in a book, labelled Persicaria. This remedy helps
to strengthen the mind for good during times of mental conflict. It erases
the impulse to do the wrong thing under stress conditions, or indeed at any
time. It can help people who, through an impulse that is not their real
self, have difficulty in giving up food, alcohol, drug or smoking addictions.
Their real self wants to give it up but the impulsive self wants the addiction.
In some rare cases a patient will become slightly worse at first when taking
Persicaria, but if they are patient and keep trying they will win the battle.

 SILKY OAK, Grevillea robusta (sun method)  
A big tree with sticky sweet flowers. This remedy is for nostalgia and for people
who have an emptiness in life due to change or loss of someone or something
- a bereavement. The positive side is making home in the present with a
full heart.

 TRIGGER PLANT, Stylidium graminifolum (sun method)  
This plant has dainty pink flowers growing on a long stem. A remedy for
temporary frustration because present circumstances prevent the realisation
of dreams and ambitions.

 TANSY, Tanacetum vulgare (sun method)  
A herb with small yellow button-like flowers, found in many gardens. This
is for the very deep depression and despair that one sinks into when feeling
cut off from all that one has previously held dear. Doubt of one's faith,
chosen path in life, or partner, when previously one had been so sure of
following the right way. Very deep despair and doubt.

 VETCH, Vicia sativa guarangustifolia (sun method)  
A legume which grows wild in the spring. It grows about 30 cm high and has
small pods which are quite edible but too small to be of value for food.
This remedy has a soothing effect on a troubled person who does not know
what job to do first. If they start one job they feel guilty that they should
be doing something else. The vetch remedy will make them happy doing one
thing at a time and be more efficient.

 WHITE GINGER, Hedychium coronarium  
This grows to approx 2 m high with large, firm, white, very fragrant flowers.
This remedy is for the person who is attempting to live a more spiritually
oriented or an improved lifestyle where more help can be given to their
fellow man. Modern living demands can lock this person's thinking too much
into the physical day-to-day life.

 WHITE PERIWINKLE, Catharanthus roseus c. v. albus (sun method)  
This flower is similar to the pie-eyed vinca, but has no pink eye. It is
sometimes called Madagascar Perrywinkle. Vinca is a common garden plant
which comes in many colours. This remedy is soothing and orientating to
a troubled, depressed or scattered spirit.

 WILD CARROT, Daucus carota (sun method)  
A cluster of white flowers with a small black central spot. This remedy
is for the person who suffers from feelings of being a black sheep, and the
odd one out in their present company.

  We have available a comprehensive booklet on the Folk Flower Tonics,
containing further detailed information on potentising, plus a full set
of colour photographs of all the flowers and plants - price $25. Roy Victor
Love, 43 Didcot Street, Kuraby 4112. Ph: 07-341-3592.

