Of fire, water, earth and air The Writings of Thickthorn by Glen Ingram  

  Last century, natural history was popular - very popular. In Australia,
like most countries in the western world, the writings of naturalists were
in demand and avidly read. But unlike in Europe, very few popular books about
the natural world were printed in the Australian colonies. There is, however,
a vast endemic literature. Unfortunately, it is hidden from most of us because
it is in newspapers. If we are to discover a tradition of Australian natural
history writing, we must look to those old periodicals.
  Here lies a paradox. Because newspapers were ephemeral, their contents
influenced few. Books would have created a tradition, but their numbers
were lacking. It is no accident that a native naturalistic writing, like
Australian science, had to be reinvented in the 1950s. But that is the
lot of a country with a colonial past.
  I would like to introduce you to `Thickthorn', my favourite writer of
natural history of yore. He wrote for newspapers in the 1880s. His style
was attractive: rich phrases moulded with spirit but marked with the hard
edge of empiricism. His description of the nest of the White-throated Warbler,
for example:

    

`Thickthorn' was the nom-de-plume of Charles Walter Devis. Devis was born
in Birmingham, England, in 1829. After completing a Bachelor of Arts at
Cambridge, he entered the Church of England and became the Rector of Brecon
in Somersetshire. Eventually, he left the church to become curator of the
Queens Park Museum in Manchester. In 1870, he departed England and settled
at Rockhampton in the colony of Queensland. There he wrote his articles
as `Thickthorn' in the tradition of the classic English clergyman-naturalists,
a class which flourished in the nineteenth century.
  One contemporary writer highlighted the advantages of combining theology
with natural history:

    

But what attracted clergymen, and indeed what made natural history so
popular across all class barriers, was Natural Theology. Its principles
were persuasive. Nature was the Creation of God and in Nature one could
see His Workings. The living kingdom exhibited His Perfection and His Spirit.
By observing Nature and attempting to understand the Creation, one came
closer to God.
  The spirit of natural theology permeated Thickthorn's writing:

    

The spirit was in his writings but God wasn't. Thickthorn was a convinced
Darwinist. Even so, the essays of Thickthorn are a cogent argument against
the proposition that Darwin killed spirit. Certainly evolution killed natural
theology. Observing nature had led to a theory that seriously challenged
the idea of creation. Natural history had become dangerous. It was no longer
a respectable pastime.
  The writings of `Thickthorn' are also a foil against the proposition that
to write scientifically as a naturalist one must write coldly. Science,
like natural history, is a world of wonder, curiosity, and imagination.
Watch `Thickthorn' as he first encounters the burrowing habits of nesting
Blackheaded Pardolates:

    

`Thickthorn' wrote his last natural history article in The Queenslander
on 18 March, 1882. But for Charles de Vis at 53, a new career was just
beginning. He changed his name to de Vis, switched to straight scientific
prose, and took the position of Curator at the infant Queensland Museum.
In the next thirty years he wrote about 200 papers and described and named
several hundred species of vertebrates from Australia and New Guinea. The
animals for which he is best remembered are Bennett's Tree-Kangaroo, the
Golden Bowerbird, McGregor's Bowerbird, the Spiny Rainforest Skink, and the
Red-eyed Treefrog.
  The death of `Thickthorn' and the birth of `de Vis' was a gain for science.
But it was a loss for natural history. What is sadder, however, is that
you, the reader, have little opportunity to read `Thickthorn's' writings.
Perhaps it is best not to lament. The 1880s were very different from the
1980s. You might be annoyed by the misinformation, stunned by the opinions,
and enraged by the shooter-mentality.
  Try this piece on one of our favourite animals!
  
  

