<subsample>
	<id> F43a </id>
	


	<source> Australian Natural History - Summer 1986-87 </source>
	


	<h> Floating giants </h>
	

  Icebergs originate from the calving events of floating ice at the seaward
boundary of outlet glaciers and ice shelves. The thick ice of the Antarctic
interior, flowing constantly outwards under its own enormous weight, converges
into fast-moving outlet glaciers at the continental margin. As the ice
protrudes into surrounding waters, the effect of buoyancy causes further
spreading and thinning, forming floating ice tongues or ice shelves. Bending
stresses, caused by waves and swell, soon extract their toll and icebergs
are born.
  Since the days of the earliest polar explorers, Antarctic icebergs have
thrilled writers and photographers, terrorised mariners, fascinated civilian
and military engineers, and tempted tourists, yet they've all but been ignored
by scientists until relatively recent times.
  Icebergs (huge frozen masses of fresh water) are a common feature of both
Arctic and Antarctic oceans. However, Antartic icebergs are generally much
larger, colder and more numerous than their Arctic equivalents. For example,
whereas a `very large' Arctic iceberg might measure 750 x 350 x 30 metres
in length, breadth and thickness, a `very large' Antarctic iceberg could
measure 1,500 x 750 x 400 metres. With these dimensions, it would weigh
up to 400 million tonnes - almost the entire annual water consumption for
the city of Melbourne - and have a freeboard (height above water) equal to
that of a ten story building (freeboard for tabular icebergs being typically
15 per cent of their total thickness). Of all the icebergs in the Southern
Ocean, those over 1,000 metres in width ('width' being the maximum horizontal
dimension at waterline) comprise only about four per cent by count, yet 51 per
cent by volume. Most Antartic icebergs, however, are less than 500 metres in width,
with the largest numbers (more than a third of all sightings) being in the size 
range of 50 to 200 metres.
  Imagine the mixture of terror and enchantment that must have 'shivered
the timbers' of early explorers, who, in flimsy and sometimes ill-equipped
sailing vessels, dared to probe Antarctic waters in search of the 'southern
continent'. One of the earliest of these explorers, to whom polar regions
were not unfamiliar, was Captain James Cook. For Cook, the hazards of sailing
among icebergs were not taken lightly. On his second voyage of discovery
(1772-1775), Cook (in the HMS Resolution) circumnavigated the globe at
an approximate latitude of 60°S, crossing the Antarctic circle on three
occasions but without actually sighting the mysterious continent they had
hoped to discover. He notes:
  &quot;...About noon came close under the above mentioned island of ice and were by
a kind of indraught or some means or other insensibly sucked so near that
we had scarce any probability of escaping being drove against it which
must have been inevitable destruction and it was equally as unknown almost
how we got off without and we scarce got a cables length from it...&quot;
  In the 20th century, icebergs have occasionally created news. The sinking
in 1912 of the HMS Titanic, for example, was caused by the collision with
a relatively small iceberg off the coast of Newfoundland, Canada. The
staggering loss of 1,513 lives, making it one of the worst maritime disasters
in the history of mankind, jolted maritime authorities into organising
the first 'International Convention for Safety of Life at Sea'. This resulted
in the introduction of safety measures (today taken for granted), such
as a place in a lifeboat for each person embarked, lifeboat drills to be
held during the voyage and a compulsory 24-hour radio watch.


	<h> Distribution and Dissolution </h>
	

  A traditional method used to collect information on iceberg distributions
during Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions has been shipboard
observations, both visual and radar, within a 12 nautical mile radius of
the ship. Icebergs sizes are estimated and the numbers within designated
size categories recorded in a logbook with latitude, longitude, water
temperature, sea-ice concentration and any other relevant information. Detailed
size measurements are gathered for tabular icebergs and the more northerly
pinnacled icebergs. In these cases iceberg height and width are measured
trigonometrically, using a sextant to obtain the subtended angle, in
conjunction with a distance obtained by radar.
  Satellite surveillance is at present not capable of monitoring iceberg
movement and decay, except for gigantic icebergs larger than say ten kilometres
in width. Typical problems incurred using satellites include obscuration
by cloud, difficulty in distinguishing between sea-ice and icebergs, limited
resolution and coverage, and difficulty recognising the same iceberg(s)
again after breakage or rollover has occurred.
  The mechanisms by which freely floating icebergs are reduced from large
to small are as yet not fully understood, although they are known to be
a combination of breakage, calving around the edges and subsurface melt.
Melt plays a relatively minor part in the dissolution of large icebergs
although it becomes the major mechanism in the dissolution of smaller,
blocky icebergs. The speed of subsurface melt is easier to appreciate when
you realise that typical Southern Ocean water temperatures are around 1°C.
Melting of the above water portion by the Sun's direct radiation also has
a negligible effect on iceberg dissolution. Generally, the meltwater so
produced percolates down into snow and firn (compacted snow) layers and simply
refreezes.
  The effect of rollover tends to enhance all of the above dissolution processes, 
particularly subsurface melting. Icebergs have been observed to roll over abruptly,
although the spectacle is one that few are privileged to witness. Rollover will 
occur when, after breakage and melting, the thickness of an iceberg becomes less 
than or equal to the width. Sometimes icebergs may 'turn turtle' (180°), 
although a roll of less than 90° is more common. Rollover is the primary 
factor responsible for pinnacles - caused by thrusting edges or corners high into 
the air. When an iceberg `rolls' it reveals a characteristic smooth and rounded 
underwater shape. Normally a wave notch is visible, marking the position of the 
previous waterline. Sometimes the waterline may be stained green from algae, 
although this is uncommon. Rollover can also identify those icebergs that have 
sediment layers embedded in the icemass. Particle matter in the ice and sediment 
from the sea floor can give rise to the appearance of black or dark green icebergs.
  Large tabular bergs, freshly calved from glaciers or iceshelves, may last
for a period of years if they either run aground or remain in waters close
to the Antarctic coast. Here the surface water is extremely cold, which
minimises melt. More importantly, however, the presence of sea-ice dampens
the swell and produces a flat sea, devoid of wave action. This environment
is one in which there are minimal bending stresses or erosion forces,
responsible for the dissolution processes of breakage and calving.
  The deep draught (portion below water) of Antarctic icebergs causes them
to drift in the direction of average current movement. Icebergs, unlike
sea-ice, are not greatly affected by winds or irregular surface currents.
Bergs will simply rip through sea-ice like tissue paper if the overall current
is at variance to the top few metres of the watermass.
  Large tabular icebergs are known to have travelled tens of thousands of
kilometres in westerly moving currents of Antarctic coastal flow (that is, around
the coast over the continental shelf). Icebergs tracked by satellite
transponder have shown typical speeds of up to half a knot.
  Size distributions of icebergs flowing in the easterly-moving Antarctic
circumpolar current have been studied statistically to determine life
expectancy. Analysis has shown that for icebergs less than 1,000 metres
in width a 'median-life' of about 0.2 years may be expected. (The term
median-life refers to the time taken for half of the icebergs in one particular
size category to be reduced to half of their original numbers by breakage
into smaller sizes.) This means that a medium iceberg of 350 metres width
could be expected to last between six months and two years before all traces
of the original berg are destroyed. Estimates of life expectancy are
necessarily imprecise because of the fact that icebergs, like human beings,
come in all manner of consistency, quality and shape.
  Recent studies of Antarctic iceberg distributions have shown that the
common northerly limit seems roughly linked to the average maximum extent
of Antarctic sea-ice at about latitude 59°S. One might be forgiven, however,
in thinking that the Antarctic convergence (or polar front), at latitude
51°S in the Australian region, would have delineated the absolute northern
boundary of icebergs, since this is where a sharp temperature difference
occurs between the cooler waters of the Southern Ocean and the warmer oceans
of mid latitudes.
  Sightings of icebergs north of the Antarctic convergence are relatively rare, 
however on 15 January 1982, two icebergs were sighted at 48°S,
111°E - only about 1,800 kilometres south of Perth. These icebergs were 
almost certainly the remnants of a gigantic iceberg and may have come from as 
far away as the Weddell Sea, more than 13,000 kilometres to the west. Icebergs at 
these latitudes were well known to the captains of the clipper ships who, after
rounding the Cape of Good Hope on their way to Australia, would have had
to weigh up the risks of steering further south to pick up the strong westerly
trade winds versus the increased likelihood of disastrous encounters with
icebergs.


	<h> Reflections in Ice </h>
	

  Perhaps on the next occasion you find yourself lounging in a reclining
chair and sipping a cool lemon-squash, you might like to reflect, finally,
on why the ice blocks in your drink have so much less freeboard than that
observed for tabular icebergs.
  The answer to this question is twofold. First, the iceberg is floating
in salt water and therefore has slightly more buoyancy. But second, and
more importantly, most of the above-water portion of a tabular iceberg is
in fact snow or firn with a density much less than that of ice. A typical
thickness to freeboard ratio for tabular icebergs is about 6 or 7:1 although
for irregular icebergs this ratio is more likely to be about 2 or 3:1.
  Icebergs are a fascinating phenomenon and a surprising amount can be learned
about them by simply watching an ice cube melt and roll over in a glass
of water!


</subsample>
