By Garry Kinnane C H A P T E R  XII Release There was a story Meredith liked of a voyager who, deciding to
     quit the sea, shouldered an oar and set off inland from the
     coast, walking and walking until he encountered a man who asked
     him, 'What is that thing you're carrying?'. He knew that was
     where he had to throw away his oar and stop. (CofC 65-6)  

His 'shark bite', as Johnston called it, was not an unqualified
success. It left him weak and depressed for a year afterwards,
short of strength and short of breath, and still underweight.
He was discharged on 21 April 1966, after a stretch of eight
months in the thoracic ward, with restricted movement in his
fingers and an inability to climb stairs.
     Strange, therefore, that soon after Johnston was
discharged, they bought an Edwardian villa that was two-
storeyed, situated in Raglan Street, Mosman, and which cost
around $12,000. The three upstairs rooms were to be occupied by
the children. Johnston was to use the front lounge room as his
bedroom and study, and this adjoined a sitting-room. Clift had
a small bedroom-study towards the rear of the house. It was
nothing like as spacious or beautiful as their Hydra house, but
it was adequate and convenient.
     Johnston continued to see a great deal of Tassie Drysdale,
mostly up at Bouddie Farm. There was more than just jokey talk
between them - Drysdale had had his personal tragedies, too,
after the deaths of his son and first wife - and the experience
of suffering was part of their bond. Bouddie had a constant
stream of colourful visitors - artists, writers, politicians -
and one time when Jack and Pat were visiting him in Sydney,
Johnston decided to take them along to Bouddie to meet the
Drysdales. It proved not to be a good idea. Under the influence
of alcohol, Johnston behaved obnoxiously to his brother,
discussing him with Thomas Keneally and others as an example of
Australian working-class culture, listing his virtues and his
'ocker' weaknesses as if Jack was not even in the room. '...
they drove me mad, analysing people,' recalled Jack. 'You'd
think they were the only brains, the only decent people, the
only good people themselves, you know ... I felt dirty
amongst 'em. I was glad to get away ...' Jack was insistent
that Drysdale himself was not a party to the discussion, and
seemed to him 'a decent sort of bloke'. But it cut him that
George led others in the assault.
     Johnston's strength returned sufficiently for him to take
on a commission from ABC Television to write the script for a
profile of Drysdale, which he began during the last months of
1966. It was filmed at Bouddie early in 1967, woven around
Drysdale painting a portrait of Johnston, and in some respects
it conveys as much about Johnston as about the painter. While
Drysdale paints, Johnston's voice-over speaks the narrative in
his husky, light tenor, or talks with Drysdale or Hal
Missingham, who is also in the film. Johnston moves about on
camera, angular, emaciated, graceful, as if his body is
weightless. At one point he discusses the sequel to My Brother
Jack, saying that the 120 pages are all wrong and have to be
done again.
     That 120 pages of draft did in fact bring Johnston
significantly closer to the finished version of Clean Straw
for Nothing. The forty-one pages that survive show that he was
at this stage trying to pick up from where My Brother Jack left
off, and create in chronological order the events of Meredith
leaving Helen and taking up with Cressida Morley in a serious
way. It gives an account of their meeting very like the one
Clift was to write in her unfinished novel 'Greener Grows the
Grass', discussed in Chapter IV.
     This draft of Clean Straw for Nothing has a more detailed
account of the first meeting between Meredith, Cressida and
Archie Calverton than in the published version. Calverton,
prior to becoming a dedicated actor, is working in tandem with
a character called Beazley as gag-writers for a radio comedian,
and they generously give up their room at Riordan's Hotel, next
to the 'old tin shed' by the Post Office in Melbourne, so that
the young lovers may spend their first night together. Since in
other parts of the novel Calverton appears to be loosely based
on Peter Finch, it has been suggested that Johnston and Clift
met Finch in this way. It is remotely possible: Finch did
travel about a good deal in the mid-1940s, and did mix with
comedy writers such as Fred Parsons and Lenny Lower, who wrote
radio shows. It is more likely, however, that Johnston and
Finch met in Sydney in 1946 or 1947, perhaps in the
Journalists' Club, where Finch often went.
     Once again, in this draft of Clean of Straw for Nothing,
he returned to the memory of those hundreds of thousands of
Chinese refugees returning to their Eastern provincial towns at
the end of the war, some of them after nine years of exile. As
with the memory of the refugees from Kweilin earlier in the
war, the staggering sight exerted a peculiar power over
Johnston. Now, in his present state of illness, and feeling
himself in his worst moments to be an 'exile' from humankind, he
began to look for an affinity, to connect himself to suffering
that occurred on a massive scale, and to seek in that journey
a reflection, and perhaps a meaning, for his own:
     He had convinced himself that everything fitted into a
     persisting continuity in which nothing had seemed quite real
     since China - since he had flown out of Chungking from the
     grassy, treacherous strip beside the Chialing, climbing up and
     over worn rocks and laboriously terraced paddies to look down
     at the fringe of the plains beyond the confluence of two
     ravined rivers, and to see below them an ant-horde of
     uncountable people disgorging from a central mat of human
     blackness ... a million exiles setting out after nearly nine
     years of war to walk back to homes in distant provinces across
     a devastated land bigger again than his own Australia ...
     nine years ... He had felt a great pity for them and for
     their journey, then eased the heaviness in his soul by
     remembering that the Chinese, like their earth, had infinite
     capacity for renewal. (Thinking back on this in later years, he
     realized that nine years after that time he had far from
     finished his own journey; indeed, had traversed only half the
     distance to disaster, with the worst for him still to come.)
     Several ideas here were to be developed into important
motifs in the final version - the linking of suffering on an
historical scale with his own private experience of it; the
idea of the journey as one answer to the search for a pattern
in life. The expression 'We are still out on the long journey
from Szechwan' recurs throughout Clean Straw for Nothing like
a refrain that acts as a touchstone for Meredith in his fight
against despair; finally, the period of nine years links the
period of exile for the Chinese with Meredith's own period of
expatriation on Hydra. This is the kind of coincidence that
Johnston was continually digging up. It was clear that what
ever else it might be, Clean Straw for Nothing was going to be
a highly self-conscious novel, with Meredith's character and
problems right at the centre of things, and no longer sharing
the limelight with a contrasting figure such as Jack was in the
first volume. For the moment he was not satisfied with what he
had written, and was allowing himself to become distracted by
less taxing projects, such as the Drysdale film.
     The rows between Johnston and Clift were if anything
getting worse as he slowly got his strength back, and felt less
concerned about how much he drank. The public humiliations
went on. At Toni Burgess's house Johnston said of Clift: 'Look
at her standing there like a fucking great praying mantis',
implying, says Burgess, that she had devoured her mate. Clift
would simply weep quietly after such attacks. 'George had
persuaded her that she was responsible for his tuberculosis,'
says Burgess, who winced at the way he could torment her over
the loss of her looks. 'She was never a match for him in the
Virginia Woolf stakes.'
     Burgess became Clift's closest friend in these years.
Appalled by what had happened to Clift since the days in the
1940s when they were young mothers together, Burgess remained
loyal, affectionate and admiring. But she disapproved of
Clift's neglect of her children, especially Shane and Jason:
'... she returned from Greece addled', Burgess insists.
     ... one moment full of wit and joy, another moment in despair.
     I remember getting up at six a.m. one morning and going to the
     market with her. It was a wonderful morning. We had breakfast
     in a 'truckie' cafe. At one point we saw a Greek or Italian
     woman walking along in front of us and Charmian said [imitating
     her rich, educated contralto] 'Isn't it marvellous: they just
     let all their pubic hair grow. Everybody here shaves it off and
     disinfects themselves. You know what we should do, darling? We
     should let all our underarm hair grow very long, like seaweed,
     stand in the wind and let it blow'. She was a peculiar mixture
     of the fanciful and the real.
     In a different sense it was also true that there were two
Charmian Clifts developing - the one of public success who wrote
novels, television plays and a newspaper column, and with a
public image of great ease and grace and a degree of wisdom
that she passed on to grateful readers. And there was the
unhappy, alcoholic wife, loathing her coarsened body, in a
state of terror every week at the prospect of writing the
column, forcing herself out of bed at 4 a.m. to get it written
before the distractions of the day overwhelmed her. The public
and distant relatives saw only the first Charmian Clift: close
friends and family watched, helpless and saddened, the decline
of the second.
     For Christmas 1966 Jason returned from his long stay with
the Russos in Victoria. Charmian wrote them a warm letter of
thanks, saying, 'He will always have two families now and be
richer to that extent.' The Russos were also coming to stay
with them over the summer, and Charmian was hoping to have
renovations to the house finished before they arrived, and that
George would be able to get away at times from his involvement
with the Drysdale film, which was occupying his time in these
early months of 1967.
     In February, Johnston wrote to Higham after a gap of about
a year in their correspondence, and explained why he had been
out of touch and doing so little serious writing. The
operation, he pointed out, had gone 'rather worse than we had
expected', and 'difficulties of accommodation', until they
bought the house in Raglan Street, had made him indolent and
depressed. He had not contacted Higham because, he said, 'I
couldn't bring myself to write when I had nothing to say that
wasn't dispiriting.' Clift also had found it impossible to
get any writing done apart from her column. Indeed this period
after Johnston's operation was a disillusioning one generally,
in which much of the gloss of their return and their optimism
about Australia changed. It was probably a reflection of their
own physical and mental depression, for the most part, but they
looked on Australian life from their position of familiarity
with Sydney affluence with an increasingly critical eye.
     However, Johnston was cheered during this year by a visit
from Sidney Nolan, for whom Hal Missingham had arranged a large
retrospective exhibition at the New South Wales Gallery to
celebrate Nolan's fiftieth year.

