By Bede Nairn Lang's Triumph  

At the end of 1929 the Labor Party held office in the
Commonwealth, in Victoria - under E. J. Hogan who had taken
over on 12 December - and in Western Australia, under Phillip
Collier. Every government in Australia was experiencing
extreme pressure from the deepening Depression. In February
1930 in the New South Wales parliament Lang said that `Every
day thousands of men are being sacked by the Government ...
The Premier has not a shilling to jingle on a tombstone'. At
the April 1930 New South Wales Party conference Theodore
forecast a Federal deficit of £3 million.
   But from October 1929 to April 1930 the main issue in the
ALP was the role of Theodore. The great Labor vote in New South
Wales at the 1929 Federal election had been fundamentally the
result of the revival of that State's traditional support for
the Party, helped by the obvious inability of the Bavin
government to check economic decline and by the positive and
purposeful opposition provided in parliament by Lang and
several of his colleagues. But Theodore had been formally the
chief organizer of the campaign and much of its success was due
to him. He was a skilful politician with an authoritative
style, feelings of greatness and a firm belief in his destiny
to become prime minister.
   To a degree Theodore was similar to Lang, sharing qualities
of ambition, durability, deviousness and ruthlessness: and
they were both determinedly anti-`red'. On the other hand, he
was Lang's intellectual superior. Theodore had the coldness of
self-assurance which, however, complemented his air of
excellence and did not prevent him from collecting a circle of
friends and admirers; yet he lacked the ability of Lang to
project a charismatic image to the people at large. Unlike
Lang, Theodore was something of an epicurean and did not scorn
the delights of books, conversation and grand occasions; he was
neither a boor nor a bore as Lang was. On balance, Theodore's
achievements as premier of Queensland outweighed his failures,
but he was not universally popular with the labour movement
there.
   He also had the serious handicap, which Lang never had, of
being an obsessive speculator, especially in mining ventures.
This habit reflected his self-centred optimism and often
conditioned precipitate judgements of people and events. And
his yearning to try to make money by company promotion and
investing in shares earned him a vaguely questionable
reputation in the Labor Party and in the business world. From
October 1929 he was under the threat of a Queensland royal
commission into some of his mining deals. It finally commenced
on 30 April 1930.
   Theodore was a cogent speaker and, when stirred, could
approach eloquence in a way Lang never could. But he lacked
Lang's demagogic gifts: above all, he did not have the long and
intimate experience the `Big Fella' had acquired from thirty
years activity in the beargarden of New South Wales Labor
politics. Indeed, Theodore's Queensland associations with the
AWU had produced grave disadvantages for him in New South Wales
and his attempts to overcome them had resulted in at least two
major tactical errors - in 1924 when his review of the
sliding-panelled ballot boxes had not exonerated Bailey, and in
late 1926 when his approach to Lang had backfired on him. At
the same time, Theodore had not placated the influential AWU
power brokers in the Federal branch of the ALP. Both Scullin,
especially, and Blakeley had been preferred to him. When
Theodore eventually became deputy Federal leader Scullin was
firmly at the top. And the 1929 Federal victory confirmed
Scullin's position.
   But in the first glow of triumph Theodore sensed the
possibility of displacing Scullin. The Herald published a short
but well-informed report over the name of F.A. Percival,
another of its senior political journalists, in which it was
stated that Theodore might make a bid for leadership at the
first party meeting after the election. Percival said that `One
union secretary yesterday described Mr. Theodore as the
greatest Australian political figure since the days of Deakin,
Barton and Reid'. He added that other union officials had the
same view; yet they recognized the great influence of the AWU
in the Federal caucus, and judged that because Theodore had
lost that union's backing he would probably not defeat Scullin.
In the event Theodore did not contest the leadership, and
Scullin was not opposed.
   The most likely interpretation of this incident is that
Percival's report was correct. Theodore realized probably
better than any other politician the difficulties of the
problems that would frustrate the Scullin Labor government. An
inspired report of his possible leadership challenge would have
the dual effect of helping to secure his position as deputy and
give notice that, should Scullin falter, he would be available
and willing to take over. More importantly, Theodore had always
wanted to depose Lang as the head Labor man in New South Wales:
this would ensure maximum caucus support for him in any future
bid for the prime ministership and safeguard his pre-selection
in the Dalley seat - while Lang remained in control of the
State machine it was always possible that one of his minions
would oust Theodore as Labor's candidate there. During the
election campaign Lang and Theodore had avoided each other; and
Theodore, aware of Garden's submission to Lang, had tried
without success to prevent the Labor Council secretary from
speaking at a big election rally in the Domain.
   Theodore had some advantages in the brief trial of strength
with the `Big Fella'. A deputy prime minister and treasurer of
the Commonwealth was a man of distinction in a Party which,
under Watson, Fisher and Hughes, had contributed much to the
foundation and early growth of the Commonwealth parliament but
which had lacked Federal power since the defection of Hughes in
1916. Theodore's prestige was complemented by his intellectual
stature and repute as a financial expert, and, specifically, by
the expectations he had aroused that he would terminate the
destructive coal dispute, now clearly seen as a lockout.
   But Theodore had set himself a huge task. The structure of
the ALP was against him. While the Party had been out of office
in the Commonwealth for thirteen years, it had formed several
governments in all of the States in that time, including three
in New South Wales. This basic fact had retarded the
development of the power and authority of Labor's Federal
branch: the centre of action, particularly evident in the
organization of elections, remained in the States: the Federal
conferences, meeting usually at three-year intervals, were
remote from the rank and file, and lacked the vitality of the
State conferences. The Federal executive had gained respect
and influence by its intervention in New South Wales in 1923,
and through it the Federal conference had improved its
authority, but that advance had been wiped out by the Federal
capitulation to Lang in 1927.
   On the personal level, too, Theodore had challenged a man
who had entrenched himself at all levels of the State Party and
whose populist aura seemed a beacon to follow to escape from
perilous times. Still, against the odds, Theodore made the bid.
He continued to gain some support at the Trades Hall and cut
himself off entirely from the State AWU. The Herald went so far
as to say that the `reds' were split over the two antagonists.
But the coal dispute was Theodore's stumbling block. His
promise to reopen the mines was not redeemed.
   Rowley James, the Labor MHR for Hunter, summed up the
emotional and constitutional dilemma plaguing the government
and, at the same time, presented a vital element of the
realpolitik of the lockout. A bold move by Scullin with solid
cabinet backing might just have provided the basis for a
dramatic political solution. `My people', said James in the
Federal parliament on 3 December 1929, `were deserted by the
party which proposed to protect them'; he went on to assert
that the government should have resumed the mines, forcing the
owners to test the action in the High Court; the resulting
political circumstances `would have caused the fall of the
Bavin government ... and the people would have rejected it,
because they would not stand for the coal-owners starving the
miners into submission'.
   James kept the tension at fever pitch on 12 December when he
sought a grant of £25 000 for the miners to tide them
over Christmas - `There are 36 000 of my constituents
absolutely on the verge of starvation'. But Scullin shrugged
off the extraordinary devastation of the Hunter region;
pointing out that there was poverty in many electorates, he
added that there were five thousand unemployed in his own seat
of Yarra, in Melbourne; the government, he said, had done all
within its powers and concluded, `we are not a government of
school boys, filled with impractical ideas'. Latham gave
grudging approval. But the famous Lang snarl would have been
activated.
   Under Bavin's strategy non-unionists were recruited to work
some mines in December. On 16 December police with revolvers
and batons confronted pickets at the Rothbury mine near
Maitland, and in the melee a young miner, Norman Brown, was
shot dead. This deplorable incident gave powerful impetus to
the vehement community resentment represented by James: and it
graphically exposed the harshness of the State government's
policy, applied by R. W. D. Weaver, on the coalfields and the
inability of the Scullin government to end the struggle.
   The tragedy generated shock waves that spread from the
Hunter Valley throughout the Australian labour movement.
Brown's death symbolized starkly the depth of the suffering of
the coal-mining communities. While the Scullin ministry was
hindered by the Commonwealth Constitution in its handling of
the dispute it seems surprisingly clear that Scullin himself
was not so understanding of the miners as a Labor prime
minister, especially one with his personal background, might
have been expected to be. But Scullin carried little weight in
the New South Wales Labor Party. Theodore received most of the
obloquy flowing from the failure of the Federal government to
make the daring move in the coal problem that was demanded by
assurances given during the election campaign, and justified by
its result. Whatever its fate, a resolute stroke would have
satisfied clear public opinion and produced a tremendous moral
boost to the labour movement: it also would have strengthened
the Federal government against its conservative opponents,
including the Senate majority, in its crucial early period.
   The day after Rothbury, Lang added to the force of the whip
hand he had over Bavin, who with his minister of mines, Weaver,
was directly responsible for industrial relations in the coal-
mining industry in New South Wales. Weaver had exulted in his
bigotry during the 1923-25 Ne Temere debate, and he remained
one of the most harmfully insensitive and obscurantist members
of the extreme right wing of the Nationalists. Lang scored
heavily against them in a censure debate although he lost the
vote.
   The State Labor Party reacted to the killing of Brown by
persuading Scullin to call an urgent conference on Saturday 21
December at the Commonwealth Bank Buildings in Martin Place.
Graves was in the chair. Scullin, Theodore, Beasley, Francis
Brennan (attorney-general) and other Federal cabinet ministers
attended. Nearly all New South Wales MHRs were there, too, with
officers of the State Party, some MLAs and leaders of the
Miners' Federation. Garden and Crofts, secretary of the
Australian Council of Trades Unions, were also present. The
Commonwealth solicitor-general, Sir Robert Garran, and the
secretary of the Prime Minister's Department, M. L. Shepherd,
accompanied Scullin.
   It was clear from the outset that Scullin and his colleagues
had been convinced by his official advisers that the government
had no power to intervene decisively in the dispute. This was
a conservative view of the constitutional problem, and almost
certainly correct, given the composition of the High Court and
the innate intransigence of Australian federalism: the Bavin government and the
mine-owners had immediately appealed to the High Court when Beeby, now a judge
of the Commonwealth Arbitration Court and perturbed by the tremors of Rothbury,
had chaired a compulsory conference on 18 December and next day issued an
interim award for the resumption of work under the old wages.

