<sample>
	<id> G15 </id>
	


	<source> Williams Woolls: a man of Parramatta </source>
	


	<note> 2002 words </note>
	


	<bl> By M M H Thompson </bl>
	


	<h> Tractarians and other afflictions </h>
	

Woolls could not have hoped for a greater acknowledgement of
the success of his school at Parramatta than the
repeated commendation it won from Sir George Gipps in his
despatches to England. Ten years spent in the colony and Woolls
could boast a happy marriage, a successful vocation, and the
friendship of many influential colonists. Having chosen to live
in the rural environment of Parramatta he soon became involved
in many aspects of the society it afforded, in particular its
religious, educational and civic affairs. It needed only the
birth there on 30 November 1842 of his second child, a daughter
to be called Emily, to make him a serenely happy young man
firmly entrenched within the Parramatta community.
   This sojourn in the bowers of bliss came to an end scarcely
18 months later. In 1844, Woolls's thirtieth year, a sequence
of grievous blows struck him. The first came on the 6 March
when William Hall, his father-in-law, died at Black Town. The
irascible 66-year-old missionary had never been well since
returning from the Bay of Islands in 1825. His asthma had
worsened, and in recent years his general health had
deteriorated. Only the attention of his wife and daughter
managed to preserve life in him. Just over four months later,
on 12 July, the sad event of Hall's death was followed by the
most crushing blow Woolls could have suffered, his wife Dinah,
in her 29th year, died in childbirth. She had been married to
Woolls for less than six years. The
incompatabilities*incompatibilities of their backgrounds and
temperaments had never been wholly tested by the rigors of
colonial life and their lives together had not been fully
realised. To compound grief further, barely another four months
later, on 3 November, the baby son William born in these tragic
circumstances also died. Thus the family vault in the cemetery
of St John at Parramatta was to receive its first three tenants
within the short space of eight months.
   With his grief trebled, Woolls confronted an ocean of
despair. Where lesser men would have been overwhelmed, Woolls,
unshaken and purposeful, sheltered within his religious faith
and accepted his ordeal. Some consolation tor his grief was
provided by his two daughters, Harriet aged five and Emily aged
two. He also had the additional distraction at this time of
being involved very deeply in community affairs. In particular
his attention was directed to two matters, one concerning the
election of Parramatta's new District Council, and the other,
a proposal then being discussed, to erect a church in North
Parramatta as a memorial to the Reverend Samuel Marsden.
   During the years following Bourke's departure from New South
Wales the institutions that attempted to regulate social and
moral behaviour in the colony were steadily moving towards the
goals set for them by reformist Whig governments. Bourke's era
had been full of promise, but it was during the administration
of his successor Sir George Gipps that many of those high
promises were carried to performance. If some colonists were
left to wonder what benefits had actually been derived during
Bourke's term of office, there were many willing to testify to
his virtues and subscribe cash to have their loyal sentiments
recorded in bronze and stone. On 11 April 1842, Gipps unveiled,
before the largest crowd yet assembled in Sydney, the colony's
first monumental work of art. It was the full length bronze
statue of Sir Richard Bourke executed by the British sculptor
and Royal Academician, E. H. Baily. The heroically posed figure
was revealed on its pedestal and plinth with a 300 word
inscription eulogising the merits of the squire from Limerick
who had held the office of colonial governor for six years.
Woolls had subscribed one guinea to the cash fund established
to commission the monument, and the tribute was erected where
Bourke could survey the town with an aristocratic hauteur not
usually associated with a liberal reformer. Bourke had guided
the colony through difficult years. Not only had the problems
of adjusting from a penal institution to a free society
confronted the community but the pressure of reform had
destroyed many of the ideas traditionally accepted in the
fabric of the social order. Woolls, like many of his fellow
colonists, did not shrink from taking an active part in this
process of change. Some of those who lent their support to new
ideas may have done so reluctantly, but they had the wisdom to
see that change was inevitable.
   During the administration of Gipps the anguish of reform
continued. Woolls stated that he was `not much addicted to
politics', but where Parramatta was concerned he did succumb to
the excitement of the hustings. An example of this occurred in
August 1842 with the determination of the townspeople to give
some form of public recognition to one of their more worthy
members. On the 27 August 1842, a testimonial meeting was held
in the Long Room at Mrs Walker's hotel to honour the services
rendered to the colony by James Macarthur. He was a true son of
Parramatta. He had been born there in 1798, the fourth son of
the `great perturbator', John Macarthur. For two years since
1840 he had been a member of the Legislative Council, the
nominated body established in 1823 to advise the colony's
governor. The group of respectable townspeople who met at Mrs
Walker's establishment approved of two resolutions giving
evidence of their high regard for Macarthur. Woolls offered a
third resolution for their consideration, proposing that they
should unite with other like-minded colonists, `to contribute
towards an appropriate testimonial ... as a mark of the
confidence they have in his [Macarthur's] efforts to obtain a
Representative Legislature for the Colony'. A subscription list
was declared open allowing their esteem to assume a more
tangible form.
   Woolls had met Macarthur when he was a master at The King's
School in 1834 and he maintained a high regard for him.
`Amongst the most enlightened and conscientious of colonial
politicians', he wrote. The Parramatta community felt the
influence of the Macarthur family in its affairs long after
John Macarthur had died, and, as with the family of Samuel
Marsden, Woolls, whilst not a family intimate, was a welcome
member of their group of friends. Woolls respected and admired
the early colonial politician:

     Though I did not ... enter into all his political views, 
     I always regarded him as a man of refined manners good    
     intentions, and an earnest desire to serve his country  
     ... as a speaker however, he was not fluent nor did he     
     always know when to leave off.

   Woolls found Macarthur verbose, which apparently was a
failing he suffered from himself. This fault was remarked upon
in the Sydney Morning Herald when it later carried a report on
the election of the Parramatta representative to the new
Legislative Council. This auspicious event was extravagantly
described by Woolls as `the dawn of liberty in New South
Wales'. The unopposed candidate for Parramatta in this first
elected body was Hannibal Hawkins Macarthur, cousin to James,
and, like him, a member of the nominated Legislative Council.
Woolls was later to say with pride:

     It is with feelings of satisfaction that I look back upon 
    the honour then assigned to me of seconding the nomination 
    of Mr H. H. Macarthur.

     In the lengthy report of the meeting given in the Sydney
Morning Herald of 15 June 1843, the occasion seems to have been
dominated by Woolls's speech. Not even the proposer Dr Anderson
or the candidate H. H. Macarthur, could equal the verbose
Woolls. In an address, punctuated with `loud cheers', and
`great cheers', he congratulated the assembly on the boon of
being now able to elect duly qualified persons as
representatives. Introducing a Latin quotation, he made
appropriate observations on the new Act which had established
the elective body and, progressing further, he referred to the
Bill of Rights and the learned words of Judge Blackstone. He
dwelt upon the proposed District Council to be elected in
Parramatta and offered a few additional remarks on the
suitability of Mr Macarthur as the new member, sentiments
which the Sydney Morning Herald said provoked `great cheering
which lasted for some time'.
   Less than 12 months later the election for the first
District Council of Parramatta took place. Woolls was to the
fore again, this time proposing the person of Mr Joseph Kenyon
as a suitable candidate. Once more the Sydney Morning Herald
provided its readers with a full account of the event:

     Mr. W. Woolls, at great length, brought forward the merits 
     of Mr Joseph Kenyon, and towards the close of his address 
     gave a very humorous version of an electioneering placard 
     of which the original was as follows:- `Vote for Joe      
     Kenyon, the friend of long pipes and colonial pigtails,    
     and the tried supporter of the yeomanry and the classes'.

Woolls's humorous anecdotes failed to carry the meeting, and on
a show of hands the day went in favour of other candidates.
   One very controversial public issue which agitated the minds
of the colonists during the early 1840s concerned a proposal to
resume the transportation of British convicts to New South
Wales. Transportation had virtually ceased in August 1840, but
two years later a petition for its renewal aroused
considerable opposition. Woolls added his voice to the anti-
transportation faction, doing so at the risk of offending some
of the parents of boys at his school. There were many in the
colony for whom a resumption of the transport system meant a
supply of cheap labour. With pride Woolls claimed that `in
conjunction with other gentlemen of the town and neighbourhood
[he had] prevented the adoption of a measure which in my
opinion would have reflected eternal disgrace on Parramatta'. 
  Thus Woolls made his gestures in the local affairs of
Parramatta. The events were not momentous ones, but to Woolls
and the members of the small community they were very significant. 
During those years when the exciting potential of self-
government for the colony was being gradually realised, the
individuals who were involved in local events were
participating in the processes of history. Even though their
actions were simple, ephemeral, and of no great magnitude, the
individuals concerned cannot bc dismissed by the historian as
unworthy of consideration. A man's days are a concoction of
trifling events, and to be given the record of even one of them
is to be provided with the opportunity to glimpse an aspect of
humanity which may be unobtainable elsewhere.
   Politics and the affairs of local government, however, were
not for Woolls. His interest in civic matters was never more
than casual. The activity he did undertake was consistent with
the efforts of a respectable young man settling with his
family into the social pattern of the district in which he
lived. As the proprietor of a school with a good reputation in
the community, it behove him to identify himself with the more
conservative groups. Indeed, it is doubtful whether his
background and temperament would have allowed him to do
otherwise. However, he adopted a much more assertive role on
issues which involved his church and his religious beliefs.
   Woolls's godliness had been demonstrated many times in
print. There was, for example, his concern for the low moral
standards that many of his fellow-colonists displayed. Their
drunkenness, immoral habits and lack of religious awareness
inspired his articles and letters in The Australian Temperance
Magazine. That journal provided him with a pulpit from which he
could freely preach. He offered his `Observations on the
Influence of Intemperance on the Intellectual Faculties and
Moral Character' and submitted his thoughts upon the topic of
`Intemperance a Political Evil'. In these and similar articles
Woolls was expressing his ambition to correct the ills of
society, a worthy but futile gesture. Indeed any sober-minded
person would have been aroused to indignation by the spectacle
within the colony of so many examples of degraded humanity. 


</sample>
