<sample>
	<id> G18 </id>
	


	<source> This Australia - Spring 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2026 words </note>
	


	<h> Rosa and Dolia </h>
	


	<bl> By June Helmer </bl>
	

European emigres of the 1920s, Dolia and Rosa Ribush had a profound influence 
on Australian theatre and the arts. June Helmer, who still regularly visits
Rosa, is fascinated by her memories.       


	<misc> Rosa </misc>
	
I am in your green calm room with filtered winter sunshine you
talking listening absorbing weaving a pattern of thoughts as
you have woven the abstract carpet fragile flowered china heavy
furniture paintings into harmony bathed in winter sunshine.
Calm descends deeply distance does not exist the night blots it
out there is sun here a light I shut my eyes and see close my
ears to the voice of the ocean and hear your
voice.
Is it that only these lines will convey my thoughts to you?
When I was a little girl I believed if only I look hard enough
and long into the pool I would see through to the other side of
the world.
Now I know that is true but the pool has grown and all my life
looks back at me.
I am grateful for the image of you.
Here - in France - I am in your green calm room.
Lina.

This was for Rosa Ribush from her friend Lina Bryans, written
in Cassis, July 1953.

Rosa Ribush is the widow of Dolia Ribush. Her story is largely
the story of her friendships. She had a great capacity for
friendship with her enthusiasm, loyalty and irresistible
charm; her fine critical intellect, limitless compassion and
generosity.
  The following story is told of her courage, when, even as a
young girl, she stood up for a friend against terrifying odds.
  Rosa's school friend was crippled and could not walk. The
teacher, a cruel sadistic man, called her to the blackboard to
work out a mathematical problem. Non compliance meant a dreaded
black mark. It was Rosa who rose to explain that it was not
possible and insisted that the teacher dictate the problem so
that the girl could work it out at her desk. When it was
completed it was Rosa who returned the paper to the teacher. To
his thunderous question `who said you could do that?' Rosa
replied, `my conscience'. `No one else had dared to intervene.
  Dolia Ribush's story is one of two great talents - for
friendship and for theatre. A.A. Phillips, his close friend and
literary adviser wrote: 
  Both were based on the same qualities - simplicity of spirit, 
  wholeheartedness in action, sensitiveness of imagination and 
  exhilarating joy in life  ... he had the drive of unflinching 
  enthusiasm and the pull of a magnetic personality. It was these 
  two qualities allied to the inheritance of a great tradition, 
  which made Ribush potentially - I say potentially - the greatest 
  influence in the Australian theatre of our lifetime. The core of 
  his influence was his intense belief in the value of theatre and
  the intense thoroughness that sprang from that belief. He had
  been bred in the Russian tradition - in which art is loved,
  believed in, respected. It has an essential difference of view
  from the British tradition of theatre.

  Dolia and Rosa loved and really understood Australia as few
foreigners can. Dolia was a very bubbling person. But the
bubbles never had a livelier gleam than when he was yarning in
a country pub, or savouring the atmosphere of a Test match, or
appreciating the Australianness of We of the Never Never. And
because theatre was the passion of his life, he wanted to see
the richness which he found in Australian life translated into
a play. Such a play was Douglas Stewart's Ned Kelly and the
climax of Ribush's life was the production of that play in
1944. When he died suddenly in 1947 he was planning to produce
Vance Palmer's Hail Tomorrow.

  Together the Ribushes made an invaluable contribution to the
artistic life of Melbourne. Rosa reminisces:
  In the 1930s and 1940s our home was the centre of intense
  intellectual artistic and literary activity. Due to Dolia's
  lovable and irrepressible personality and his effervescence as
  a host everyone came to our home. It was `Open Sundays' like
  a Salon.

  The mingling of friends was marvellous. There were Russian
intellectuals like Aaron Patkin, Australian actors, writers,
publishers, playwrights, producers, lawyers; Irene Mitchell,
A.A. Phillips, Nettie and Vance Palmer; Frank Dalby Davison, Clem
and Nina Christeson, Betty Rowland, Jean Campbell, Brett
Randall, P.D. Phillips and many others; there were the Yiddish
writers Melech Ravich and Pinchas Goldhar; artists Lina
Bryans, Jock Frater, William Dargie and Norman MacGeorge;
musicians Jascha, Tossy and Issy Spivakovsky. There was Czech-
born Edouard Borovansky, `Boro' as he was affectionately
called, and dancers from the Russian ballet companies.
  Every Sunday afternoon began with a rehearsal of plays for
those who shared Dolia's passion for the theatre - always
Irene Mitchell and A.A. Phillips and many others.

Rosa took no part in the Sunday rehearsals (except for special
occasions when she would be called on to use her linguistic
skill to shape a Russian text into a more flowing version).
Like a Chekhovian character she would lie in bed, propped up on
her large, Russian, lace-edged pillows, with a great pile of
books on one side and an inexhaustible supply of chocolate on
the other. She would rise after the rehearsal, when the other
guests would arrive. Looking marvellous, with eyes sparkling,
she was the perfect hostess, moving from room to room. She
would lead the conversation, let drop a word or two to
stimulate discussion or to provoke passionate argument.
`Russian discussions' they were called, when everybody would
speak at once.
  There were also great parties; parties which were dramatic
productions in  themselves. There were parties with a theme:
a Turkish party; a night in Montmartre; a Persian party or a
gypsy party; each with the appropriate decor and costumes.
Friends would bring friends and every famous name visiting
Melbourne went to Ribush parties. Dolia would cook and prepare
for two days: serving Russian delicacies and vodka that were
rare in those days. Entertainment was mainly talk and the
exchange of ideas but if the party did not last for two days
Dolia was very disappointed. Melbourne had never known such
parties - they added a new dimension to the social scene.
  Rosa and Dolia Ribush had arrived in Melbourne on Cup Day,
1928. For this Russian Jewish couple, educated in the European
tradition and steeped in Russian culture, it was a puzzling
introduction to their new country to find everything closed.
Though Rosa had quite a good knowledge of English (Dolia spoke
none), she found it hard to comprehend a strange culture where
everything stopped for a horse race. Despite this, and their
almost penniless and friendless state, they managed to find a
`very cheap boarding house' and began their new life.
  Dolia was born and educated in the part of Russia which was to
become Latvia. He served as an officer in the Russian army in
Petrograd during World War 1. He saw performances of great
plays, he acquired a profound knowledge of Russian theatrical
tradition, the practice of the Moscow Art Theatre and
Stanislavsky's principles (although he did not attend the
Moscow Art Theatre). He had his first theatrical experience as
an actor and producer in Riga. Although his father approved of
his son's involvement in the theatre he insisted on a practical
trade in case of necessity and so Dolia learned the
confectionery business.
  Rosa was born in Libau, a Russian provincial town, also to
become Latvian. After completing her high school education,
her family moved to Petrograd where she attended the
University, studying history and philosophy. At the same time
she did compulsory work in the passports office and also
indulged her passion for Russian literature and theatre. Like
most young intellectuals of her time, Rosa was initially
sympathetic to the aims and ideals of the Revolution (although
her father was a Czarist) and she heard the Russian greats,
Trotsky, Lenin, Kerensky and Gorki.
  But life became very harsh in Petrograd; idealism turned to
terrorism and the family, with the help of an American uncle,
returned to Libau. With the uncle's financial assistance Rosa
then went to Berlin, where she lived within the Russian
community whilst studying languages at the Berlin university.
She began to teach Russian and German and worked at an
antiquarian bookshop without salary because of her love for
fine books. In 1926 she returned to Libau where she and Dolia
were married.
  There was no future for them in Libau so they decided to
migrate to Australia. They left politics behind - what they
brought to Australia was a rich background of Russian culture.
Dolia, with Rosa's help, began to make sweets (although Rosa
had no training in this field) but as soon as the business
began to prosper she turned to the teaching of Russian and
German. Dolia's aim was to make his chocolate factory
successful so that he would be free to devote more time and
money to the theatre.

Dolia's involvement in theatrical entertainment began in 1932
when he participated, with others from the Russian community,
in an International Evening of Russian music and drama
arranged by Dr Aaron Patkin. Dolia produced, adapted and acted
in Russian sketches which were repeated the following month at
the Comedy Theatre as part of Blockheads in Love arranged for
the Institute of Pacific Relations.
  It was to take eight more years before he realised his ambition
to produce a major work. On 7 November 1936, his production of
Maxim Gorki's Lower Depths opened at the Garrick. It was a
revelation to Melbourne theatre goers - nothing like it had
been seen before. Arnold Haskell; the famous balletomane, who
was in Melbourne with the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo wrote:
  In Melbourne to my surprise - I went unwillingly - I saw the
  finest amateur performance of my life ... The play was an
  exceptionally difficult one - Gorki's Lower Depths - the
  producer Dolia*Dolya Ribush ... His cast was drawn from every walk
  of life, and he bullied them and sweated them, after a long
  preliminary study of the play, until they behaved like Gorki's
  unfortunate Russians, looked like them, moved like them,
  reproducing every detail of the Moscow Arts Theatre production
  ... 
  Two years later, in November 1938, Dolia produced Chekhov's 
The Cherry Orchard. Nettie Palmer wrote in her diary:
  Rehearsals of The Cherry Orchard are nearing their end. The
  more I watch them the more my admiration for Dolia Ribush
  grows. He's not merely a producer he's a creator, keyed up in
  every nerve to bring something living out of a void ... Have
  I ever met anyone to whom Art means so much? His general
  methods may be Stanislavsky's but his delicacy and exuberance
  are his own ... everyone of these rehearsals (and they've
  lasted over a year now) has filled me with excitement, a sense
  of being enriched, a deeper belief in what Art can give to
  Life.

  `Dolia had the music of Russian plays always with him' is how
Irene Mitchell describes Dolia's productions.
  In 1942 Dolia was commissioned by the New Theatre to produce
Distant Point, a play of modern Russia by A. Afinogenev, to
celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Russian Revolution. The
cast was a good one, the production, in Dolia's hands,
extraordinarily fine. It was artistically a great success but
only the discriminating few enjoyed it and it was a financial
disaster for the New Theatre.
  Dolia then turned his enthusiasm to Australian drama, in
particular to the production of Douglas Stewart's Ned Kelly.
A.A. Phillips had given him a copy of the play at midnight and
by 8.30 next morning he was telling A.A. Phillips `I must have
it'. He and Arthur Phillips worked on the play, and letter
after letter passed between them and the author to perfect it
for the stage. A week was spent with Stewart in Sydney revising
the play and after a visit by Dolia, Rosa and Irene Mitchell to
his home in the Blue Mountains, Norman Lindsay drew a complete 
set of stage designs, sets, costumes and characters. 


</sample>
