By E M Kelsall Chapter 16 SHARMAN'S SHOW  

  Our new home consisted of two rooms with a little hut out the
back, where my brother and I slept. There was just room for a
double bed, shoved hard against a wall papered with Smith's
Weeklys. Many a punch was swung when my brother came home late
from a dance and had to clamber over me to get to his side of
the bed. Mum and the two girls had the other bedroom, and when
Pop was home he had a single bed on one end of the back
verandah. He made this private by tacking hessian to the posts.
The kitchen-dining-lounge room was the biggest room in the
house, but even this became cramped when Mum shifted her old
sideboard into it.
  This sideboard was her pride and joy. Its mirror was
surrounded by shelves and projections of carved wood which
supported all the pretty china that had been broken, down
through the years, and then lovingly stuck together again with
Tarzan's Grip. These looked really beautiful, reflected in the
mirror at night by the kerosene lamp, which had hand-painted
flowers on the bowl.
  Harry, one of the men Pop often worked with in the bush,
moved in next door with his family. They were going through
tough times too, but Harry had an old battered Chevrolet truck
with which he was often able to make a few bob.
  Another mate of theirs named Viv had a Chrysler Plymouth, so
Pop, Harry and Viv approached the manager of the Murray River
Sawmills for a contract cutting wood for the PS Adelaide. The
manager obliged, but stipulated that the wood had to be landed
in an area below Barmah, as this was just about where the
steaming wood loaded on the Adelaide at Echuca would cut out.
  The three battlers piled into the Plymouth and went out to
see what they could find in the way of three or four hundred
ton of wood. They returned home in high glee, for the owner of
Madowla Station and Orange Grove had given them permission to
cut all redgum on the ground for a threepence a ton royalty.
They had further luck when a gang of Italians who had the right
to all the box wood told them they could cut all the box timber
left behind because it would he too thin for footblocks.
  I went with them because I had nothing else to do and worked
like a slave for the three of them. I received many
compliments on how well I could swing an axe, but that's all I
did receive - not a penny of pay.
  I decided I'd make a couple of bob by catching crayfish in
the Goulburn River, which we crossed each day at Stewart's
Bridge on the way to work. On the way home we lifted the nets
to find a catch of four very large crays, but discovered we had
nothing to put them in. `Throw the bastards back in', said
Harry. `Not on your life', I said. `They'd be worth two bob.'
So Viv solved the problem by putting them tail-first in the
huge pockets on the inside of each door in the car.
  When we got home we found out it wasn't such a good idea,
because we were confronted by powerful claws waving around.
Harry said, `C'mon Mick, you grab one claw, I grab the other.'
Then, in a moment of doubt, he added, `But don't you miss'. I
did miss, but the crayfish didn't. It swung its free claw over
and clamped on to one of Harry's fingers.
  His anguished screams caused blinds to be pulled back. but in
a conservative little town like Moama no one would venture out
even if a murder was taking place. Harry's profanity was
getting him nowhere so he began pleading with us to `Poke your
finger in his eyes'. Gingerly we tried this but the cray seemed
to have the ability to retract his telescopic eyes. Then Viv
had an inspiration. He grabbed a pair of pliers from the
toolbox and plunged into the door pocket to where he thought
the cray's claw was. Feeling them glide onto an object, he
closed them with all his strength and twisted his wrist. Harry
let out a wild shriek and subsided to the ground sobbing with
the cray still attached to him.
  Pop stomped the cray to death, and only then did Viv discover
it was the top end of Harry's finger that he was trying to
break off. When he recovered enough Harry promised to `do' for
me by kicking me to death, but I overcame this by taking off
for home, giggling like a schoolgirl.
  The next morning Harry had a dreadfully mangled finger, an
injury that would have kept most men away from work. But he
turned up because he knew none of us could drive the truck.
  A few mornings later, as we came in sight of our half-loaded
truck, Harry remarked. `The Dagos are late gittin' out this
morning'. Then he added, `They must be fightin', for they're
standin' apart'.
  One group of four cutters was standing at their campfire, one
with a double-barrelled gun. The two brothers who ran the
business, both huge men, were standing alongside our truck and
when Viv stopped the car they moved toward it. Pop and Harry,
who were sitting on the side nearest them, opened their
windows and when they did both Italians ran at the car
screaming. `I chop you bloody neck off'. They were leaping with
rage with their hands slipping up and down the handles of our
axes.
  I thought Pop and Harry were goners, and couldn't help
feeling glad I was on the other side of the car. Pop was the
coolest in a crisis and began talking calmly, saying, `Cool
down a bit, mate. Let's know what's eatin' you.' Gradually, in
very excited tones they told what was `eatin'' them. They had
kept the wood around the camp for any wet days that occurred,
but we had begun to cut it.
  With the axes and gun in mind we humbly apologised, but the
Italians were unforgiving. They cancelled our previous
arrangement whereby we cut any box wood they left behind.
  As the Italians put down the axes and walked back to the fire
Harry began to frantically search the seat and floor of the
car. He couldn't find what he was looking for and was very
disturbed when he told us, `My Gawd, I've swallowed a bloody
lighted cigarette, holder an' all'. He must have, for we never
found it.
  There was no future without the box wood, so we decided to
take a chance and finish off the hundred odd ton by moving
illegally into the forest and cutting without a permit. This
saved us two pounds, which we didn't have anyhow.
  We were driving through the forest in thick fog early the
next morning when Harry frightened the hell out of us by
screaming `Look out!'. Viv did look out, just in time to bring
the car to a halt with its front wheels a few inches away from
a twelve-foot drop into a creek. Viv voiced what we were all
thinking when he said `I think this job's got a jinx on it'. In
similar conditions the next morning, we thought we were
following our tracks out from the night before, but in reality
they were the tracks we'd made in the morning. We all woke up
what was happening too late, and the front wheels went over the
edge. The chassis dug itself into the clay bank and there we
sat, too frightened to move in case the lot went over. Slowly
the two men in the front seat edged out, then hung on the rear
of the car while Pop and I made our exit.
  `Oh Gorblimey, I can't take much more of this', said Harry.
`We're gonna cop it for sure. Look,' he went on, `Me bloody
finger is broken and poisoned, I got a bloody cigarette holder
caught sideways in me back passage, and if I drop off ter sleep
of a night I dream me bloody head's rollin' around the floor of
the car after it's been chopped off by a big Dago. And with me
own axe, too!'
  We never took any notice of his moans, for blokes like Harry
could put you on. If you didn't wake up to them, as Unc once
put it, they'd kid you up country without a swag.
  We cut the amount of wood the boss required, without getting
caught cutting without a licence, but the mill held back the
threepence a ton royalty for the Madowla owners, which meant
they got one pound, five shillings for nothing. What made it
worse was the fact that not a word could be said about it
without us putting our own weights up.
  After they'd cashed their cheque they went to the local and
had a few. Perhaps that's why Harry called me over to the fence
and told me, `You've been a good poor bugger. Here's two bob.
Go to the dance tonight.' The old-time dance held at the Echuca
Fire Station was one bright spot in otherwise dull weeks, where
people of all ages gathered on the Saturday night and enjoyed
themselves.
  There was rarely any misbehaviour in the hall, for no drunks
were admitted, and when a difference of opinion occurred
between men it was usually settled outside. They came from as
far afield as Kyabram - farmers, farmhands, timber workers,
drovers, and an odd businessman. One of the latter was infamous
among the girls. He was pot-bellied and strong as an ox, but
just couldn't dance without getting an erection.
  One unsuspecting young woman accepted his invitation to
dance, and when it was over, returned red-faced, to her seat
alongside my sister. She whispered to her, `That was awful. He
pulled me in close, and after that my feet never got within six
inches of the floor.' Gradually his reputation became known and
none of the girls would dance with him.
  Midweek dances were sometimes held at places like Koyuga,
Moama and Picola. The promoters of the dances - usually tennis,
football and cricket clubs - would hire a furniture van to
take a crowd from Echuca. The van belonged to `Toots', who
stood for no hanky-panky and had a `not wanted on the voyage'
list of people banned from his van.
  At Koyuga one night a dance was held to help raise funds for
a beauty queen. Entries for the `Monte Carlo' were sixpence a
head, and the prize was a small box of chocolates each to the
winning couple. My partner and I won it. I gave mine back for
a lucky spot dance and won it again. All in all I got the prize
three or four times, until the boys started shouting, `Slug up'
(fraud).
  Every now and then one could see a couple slip out of the
hall. On this occasion a young farmer yelled out across the
hall to a girl he'd been dancing with, `Yer better come out
after me. It won't look as bad then.'
  At Moama School of Arts dances, the slipping out was by the
men to the pub across the road. While the police kept a close
watch on the boys who gathered in the entrance hall they never
seemed to see the stream of blokes heading across the road. A
visitor to the dance from Echuca, one of the most inoffensive
of chaps, was standing talking to his mate when he was grabbed
by the collar and the seat of the pants and bundled off to the
lockup. Old `Fisheyes' had given the nod in his general
direction and a zealous young cop grabbed the wrong bloke. He
proved in court he didn't commit whatever offence it was, and
the case was dismissed.

