By Alister Kershaw George Gribble  

NOW how old would George have been when we first met? Not very
much over sixty, as nearly as I can calculate. He was in
excellent physical shape, he walked briskly, he held himself
well. Intellectually, too, you might say, he held himself well.
He should have given the impression of being rather less than
his age. However, he didn't. On the contrary. I'm not sure why
this should have been so. Was it perhaps because he spoke with
the intonation and occasionally in the idiom of an upper-class
Edwardian? Or was it because of a certain aristocratic languor
in his manner, or because he was accustomed to express himself
in a meandering fashion which might almost have been mistaken
for a symptom of senescence? Or because he was often vague to
the point of seeming to exist on the astral plane? Whatever the
reason, there's no denying that, in the initial stages of one's
acquaintance with him, he struck one as being distinctly older
than he was.
  One very soon got over this misapprehension. A livelier
fellow was never born. He was ready to talk until any hour of
the night - you couldn't stop him talking until any hour of
the night - and his conversation was at once erudite and
extremely droll. He was remarkably receptive to whatever was
new and radical in the arts, he had none of the tetchy
prejudices or morose nostalgia of the elderly. He lived very
much in the present.
  His physical stamina was frightening. On one of his birthdays
- it must have been his seventieth, I fancy - my friend
Deasey and I took him to dinner. George's circumstances were
such that he was rarely able to treat himself to a restaurant
meal. This birthday, we felt, was an event which justified,
which indeed demanded, a certain excess. We drank two or three
aperitifs, we drank two or three bottles of wine, we had cognac
with our coffee. From the restaurant we went to one of the
cafes on the Boulevard Montparnasse and ordered champagne.
George had drunk level with us at the restaurant; he now
proceeded to leave us well behind. We ordered another bottle
but we were becoming uneasy. Surely George was forgetting his
venerable age? It was highly imprudent of him to drink as if he
were a youngster like ourselves. We didn't want the festivities
marred by having him keel over with a heart attack.   
  By the time we had finished the second bottle of champagne, 
Deasey and I were ready to call it a day. Anyway, the cafe was 
about to close.
  "So soon?" said George wistfully. "It seems a pity to break
up such an interesting conversation. Isn't there anywhere...?"
  "Well, it's about three o'clock, George. The only places that
are open now are the nightclubs."
  "Nightclubs! Good heavens, it must be thirty or forty years
since I ... Or quite possibly more ..."
  We went to a nightclub. It was daylight when we left George
and stumbled towards our beds.
  Within minutes, it seemed, I was awakened by a knock at the
door. I had the ugliest hangover since the discovery of
fermentation. I could hardly see, I could hardly speak. I
croaked something inarticulate. The door opened. It was George.
He had drunk far more than I and he was at least forty years
older. I looked at him blearily. He was immaculate and full of
bounce.
  "Good God! Did I wake you up?" he said on a note that
conveyed a mild disapproval of such sluggardly habits. "I never
dreamed you'd still be in bed. It's nearly ten o'clock. I just
dropped in to thank you for that invigorating evening."
  Invigorating? What a nerve! That was the only time I ever
hated George.
  Presumably nobody these days has heard of him. Not many
people had heard of him when he and I met in 1947 - nor, if it
comes to that, before then. He wrote plays. They were
characterized by a bland disregard for current taste, as though
Maugham and Coward had never happened, but in their own way
they were pretty good. Marie Tempest thought well enough of his
Masque of Venice to play the lead in it. George could
reasonably have expected to enjoy a modest success in the
theatre.
  The trouble was that he had the most abominable luck. As soon
as a play of his was accepted for production, there'd be a war
or a general strike or some similar calamity. I wouldn't be in
the least surprised to discover that the Wall Street crash only
occurred because some foolhardy American producer had taken one
of George's plays.
  Through all these mishaps and disappointments, George went on
living his life (it was not always clear how) with the utmost
insouciance, as though he had not noticed his ill fortune or
had not thought it sufficiently interesting to merit his
attention. His complete unawareness of the tawdry realities of
everyday existence, his grandiose vagueness, were what the
obituary writers would have called an inspiration to all who
knew him.
  "Y-es, y-es," he said one day when telling me some anecdote
of his youth, "I remember going to the office - "
  "An office?" I interrupted in astonishment, "you, George, you
in an office? But what on earth were you doing in this office?"
  "Oh," replied George with a negligent wave of the hand,
"work, you know, and things of that kind."
  Was there ever a more patrician dismissal of the fatuous and
febrile activity that goes on in offices?
  Unlike most people, I knew something of George before our
paths actually crossed, but only because Richard had talked
about him in his autobiography. Pound, Marinetti, D.H.
Lawrence, Eliot, Herbert Read, H.D., Yeats and loads of other
notables crop up in Richard's memoirs. Somehow, it was the
obscure George who, as I read Richard's account of him, 
provoked in me the keenest curiosity.

  One lovely autumn day in Rome (Richard recalled), the gun and
  bells announced noon; and I put away work for the day. At that
  moment, enter George. No, he wouldn't sit down, he was in a
  hurry, he merely wanted to ask ... I forget what. I was engaged
  in removing the oil from the top of a wine-flask for lunch,
  which was being prepared over a charcoal fire. I was conceited
  about this wine, and insisted that George must taste it.
  Protesting that he must leave at once, he sat down on the edge
  of a chair and took a glass. Conversation started. George grew
  interested, and discoursed with knowledge and eloquence,
  gradually and unconsciously settling himself more comfortably
  in his chair. I refilled his glass in spite of his fainter
  clamours that he must go. Presently lunch was put on the table.
  Starting to his feet, George said he must go. This, we said,
  was ridiculous. He had to have lunch somewhere, and how could
  he get it more quickly than when it was served under his nose?
  Still protesting, George shared our frugal meal, and finally
  left about four o'clock. Only later did we discover from the
  reproaches of his wife that George was supposed all that time or
  part of it to be interviewing the Pope or the Prefect of Rome
  or some other bigwig for the American paper whereof George was
  supposed to be Rome correspondent.
  But what wisdom! George was bound to lose the job, so why not
  lose it pleasantly and instructively?

  Such was the delightful sport (in the entomological sense of
the word) who came to visit Richard during the first summer I
spent at the Villa Aucassin. After Richard's depiction of him,
I expected someone rather farouche, an ageing Bohemian. He was
anything but that. He was positively spruce in appearance,
although his clothes were well worn; his shoes were worn, too,
but they were beautifully polished, his hair was neatly cut,
his thin distinguished face impeccably shaved. With our
espadrilles, blue cotton trousers and open-necked shirts,
Richard and I were lamentably down-at-heel by comparison.
  Nobody could have looked more invincibly English than George
although in fact his mother had been German and he himself,
married to a Frenchwoman, had spent most of his adult life in
France and Italy. If I remember correctly, he had also - with
exemplary lack of success - attended universities in Germany
and the United States as well as in England. He was the most
complete cosmopolitan I ever encountered.
  Apparently he always had been. Immured at one point in his
career in some ghastly English public school, he soon reached
the conclusion ("They would play games all the time") that
enough was enough. Abruptly, at the age of fifteen, with less
fuss than his contemporaries would have made about a journey
from Piccadilly to Wimbledon, and in the middle, as it might
be, of the Michaelmas term, George took off for Germany.
"D'you know," he told me, "d'you know, when I got off the train
in - where was it? Trier? Nuremberg? - anyway, I stepped
right into a weinfest just outside the station. You can't
imagine how reviving it was after having had to swallow so much
ginger-pop."
  George would certainly not have narrated his little story
half as coherently as this. He spoke English, German, French
and Italian with equal ease, but he could not always make up
his mind which of the languages he ought to be speaking. As a
consequence he would not infrequently switch capriciously from
one to another in midsentence:
  "   my dear fellow,    who recently 
published     ...?"
  On other occasions, this linguistic indecision of George's
would manifest itself differently. He would manage to limit
himself to one language at a time but, as far as his
interlocutor was concerned, it would invariably be the wrong
one:
  "  ?"
  "I'm sorry, George, but the only word I understood was `Sartre'."
  "  ."
  "George, I don't know Italian either."
  "   opinion ..."
  "Well, of course, we can always talk French if you insist,
but wouldn't it be more sensible to stick to English?"
  "Yes, naturally, naturally, I can't for the life of me think
why ..."
  Really, one had to admire George's ability to create what are
now called communication gaps. Even when he contrived to speak
a single language, and even when that language was the right
one, he had a most disconcerting propensity to omit the one
word which would have made his meaning altogether clear, while
further compounding the listener's bewilderment by laying a
marked stress on other words where no particular emphasis was
required.
  In a letter recounting a luncheon to which he had taken him,
Richard admirably rendered this aspect of George's verbal
eccentricity. "The old George," Richard reported, "chirruped
over his cups and was mightily content. On the other hand, I
must avow to you in secret that some of his discourses somewhat
baffle me. What is one to make of such statements as this?

  `Oh, ye-es, ye-es, of course - reminds me of something that
  happened - good many years ago now - mos' straw'ny affair -
  never really cleared up - matter of fact, he was a very
  distant cousin of mine - least, so my sisters said - you
  never know - can't remember his name of course - Yvette would
  know - it was before Guy - she was going to have a baby and
  so on - so forth - made a great impression on her - can't
  remember what he did - perhaps he - no, no - anyway,
  something he ought not to have done - it was in the papers -
  can't remember which ones - but you must remember - many
  important people involved - friends of Prince of Wales - ye-
  es, ye-es - so on - so forth - made 'normous impression on
  me - recollect it all perfectly ... '

Difficult as it often was to understand George's elliptical and polyglot conversation (or conceivably in part because of the difficulty) one couldn't have wished for a pleasanter man with whom to pass an evening.

