<sample>
	<id> G27 </id>
	


	<source> An entertaining war </source>
	


	<note> 2004 </note>
	


	<bl> By Michael Pate </bl>
	

During 1942 Australian armed forces were in action in the
Middle East, New Guinea and New Britain fighting important and
decisive battles. It wasn't until well into the year that the
population at large realised the incredible gallantry of the
men who had fought their way up the Kokoda Trail to stop the
Japanese in their tracks for the first time. Ultimately it
dawned on them that the issue at stake had been not just the
defence of Port Moresby and the northern approaches to
Queensland, but the very existence of Australia itself.
     And with our fighting men up there in the stinking jungle
fastnesses of the Islands there were always concert parties.
Often they took entertainment of one form or another to the
troops; more often they bent their backs and risked their lives
at the more dangerous tasks of war.
     During late 1941 and early 1942 Divisional and Lines of
Communication Area Concert Parties came into existence in
Australia. The 2nd Division CP gave its first shows at Walgrove
Camp; the 3rd Division CP was formed by Staff Sergeant (later
Lieutenant) Tom Rothfield in June of 1942; the NSW Lines of
Communication Area CP, known as `The Waratahs', came together
in mid-year also; the Victorian Lines of Communication Area CP
was known originally as `The Yarraroos' and later as `The
Kookaroos'; the Western Australian Lines of Communication Area
CP was `The Walocs'; and without hesitation the Tasmanian Lines
of Communication Area CP dubbed themselves the `Tasmaniacs'.
Other CPs which came into being included the `30 Club' CP which
formed within the 30th Brigade, the New Guinea Force CP, the
Milne Bay Force CP, and the unique `50-50 Show' - a
combination of Australian and American servicemen. CPs were
also formed out of personnel in the 1st, 4th and 5th Divisions,
the 1st Armoured Division (known as `Tanks-a-Million') and 3rd
Armoured Division (`Shells-a-Poppin''). All these units worked
at first under the control and guidance of Australian Army
Amenities Service. Eventually, along with some others which
were formed later in the war and the various CPs which had
served in the Middle East, they were brought together under the
command of Captain (later Major, finally Lieutenant-Colonel)
Jim Davidson late in 1943. Headquarters was moved from a
cramped office in Victoria Barracks to larger, though not more
comfortable, accommodation in some tin sheds at Sydney
Showgrounds. Davidson and his many merry bands of entertainers
were to shuffle in and out of the showgrounds, on their way to
and from the Islands, until 13 May 1944, when they moved into
the old National Film Studios in the Sydney suburb of Pagewood.
It was almost another year after that before the order came
through officially designating them as the 1st Australian
Entertainment Unit.
     But many things were a long way off in those days,
including victory over Japan. Jim Davidson, who had volunteered
in late 1940, returned to Australia from the Middle East in
late 1942. Shortly before Christmas he was ordered to report to
General Blamey's headquarters in Port Moresby. At dawn on
Christmas Day he boarded a flying boat at Rose Bay, Sydney, and
was soon winging his way north to the combat zones.
     In his book A Showman's Story: The Memoirs of Jim Davidson
(Rigby, 1983) he recalled that:


	<note> quote </note>
	

     One of these parties, typical of the rest, was the 2nd
Division CP. It was formed and gave its first shows in
midsummer 1941-42, and received the official imprimatur of
Divisional Headquarters towards the middle of 1942. Throughout
the latter months of 1941 the recall of many thousands of men
to their units brought the 2nd Australian Infantry Division to
nearly full strength. Brigadier-General `Bertie' Lloyd - a
considerate, caring and sophisticated man - provided the
inspiration for the formation of a concert party for the
Division in the first place.
     With the division in training at a camp west of Sydney,
Lloyd very quickly realised that the troops were short of
entertainment. He summoned a number of men (those who had been
professional entertainers or musicians in civilian life) from
various of his units and suggested it would be a good idea if
they could organise some shows for the troops. So this small
group of `pros' put their heads together, gathered around them
a number of other kindred spirits, and on a hot and sultry
summer's night gave a show in the boxing ring at Walgrove Camp.
     Additions and subtractions were later made to the original
complement for that concert, but the nucleus of the 2nd
Division CP, gathered under the guidance of Captain John Allen
and Captain Crosby-Brown, with Lieutenant John Lennigan
(formerly of the WA Lines of Communication Area CP as Officer
in Charge, now Officer in Charge of the unit and baritone
singer) was:

             
	<note> list omitted </note>
	

     The 2nd Australian Infantry Division was given final leave
in mid-1942 amidst strong rumours they were destined for New
Guinea. On three troop-ships we sailed out of Sydney Harbour at
1640 hours on Saturday 4 July and were met by two cruisers, one
American and the other Dutch, but instead of turning north the
convoy turned south. An eighteen-day voyage, of which some
fifteen days were spent in high storm as the troop-ships and
escorts battled their way down to the south of Tasmania and
across to Fremantle, saw the Division disembark there and
proceed north up the coast of Western Australia. Both the
people of Western Australia and their newspaper editors had had
their wish fulfilled - troops had been sent to defend the west
against the Japanese.
     The 2nd Division CP was transported by cattle-truck across
the Nullarbor to Perth. Headquartered at Guildford while they
prepared several shows, they were moved up the coast a short
while later to Divisional Headquarters at Geraldton to begin
their first tour of duty. Then known as `The Black and White
Diamonds'- the divisional colour patch being a black-and-white
diamond set on the familiar pale grey AIF background - the
party's first three shows were `Blitz and Peaces', `Turkish
Delight' and `Those Were the Days'. 
     An extract from a letter home to my family at the turn of 
1942-43 gives some impressions of a new recruit to the 2nd 
Division Concert Party:


	<note> quote </note>
	

     Undoubtedly at first the members of the 2nd Division Concert Party had a
fairly easy time of it in and around Guildford with frequent excursions into
Perth, but from the minute they headed up the coast in the latter months of 1942
and headquartered out of Geraldton they were worked to the artistic bone.
     For the better part of the next year the concert party did hundreds of shows
up and down the coast of Western Australia, and inland at such God-forsaken (or
so it often seemed to the members of the party) places as Mullewa, Mingenew,
Moora and Gingin. Only at Dongara, where we could forgo Army rations and gorge
ourselves on the small crayfish for which the little seaside town was rightfully
famous, and at Geraldton where we could go down to the beach and swim and chat up
some of the WAAFs who frequented the beach, did we get a break from the grind of
giving show after show after show. It wasn't exactly in the front line, but it
was hard, demanding, back-breaking, and sometimes a little dispiriting, travail.
     Still, we improved our swimming and our sun-tans. And we were undoubtedly
popular, not only with the girls and the townspeople but also with the troops in
our many audiences. At the end of 1943, after some eighteen months of service,
the concert party returned to Sydney (once again by cattle-truck across the
Nullarbor, at least for part of the way). After a brief leave we found ourselves
heading first to Thursday Island and the various other islands thereabouts,
thence to Dutch New Guinea and back to the Atherton Tableland for another tour of
duty. Another short leave, then we were off to New Britain (Jacquinot Bay and
Wide Bay) and back to Lae and Nadzab for a last tour of duty before the war
ended.
     But in late 1943 that was all a long way off, and for most of that year the
2nd Division CP stepped out on to the stage night after night to give a show to
the troops in Western Australia, wherever they might be, encouraged and downright
pleased by the applause which greeted it every time it performed.
     The day-to-day grind of `touring' never really got into letters home, but
there were any number of lighter moments recorded. Several from that sly,
consummate and discerning observer and wit, Colin Croft, are worth recalling.
     Under the subtitle CONCERT PARTY MATA HARIs, Colin had this to say:


	<note> quote </note>
	

     Before Colin Croft learned the awful truth about the Vicar and his wife, it
is clear they steered him to a sort of religious rejuvenation. It wasn't until
the concert party was much further north at Geraldton, however, that Colin, a
regular church-goer, found another venue for his varied and considerable talents.
As he tells the story:


	<note> quote </note>
	

     In actual fact there was quite a lot to do in Geraldton if a soldier took
the trouble to enquire around, or if he looked up what Army Education had to
offer, which was usually a great deal. For example, many a young soldier's
musical appreciation was greatly enhanced by the various concerts which Army
Education organised. Some fine artists visited Geraldton and performed in the
Town Hall, among them the great Australian pianist and Chopin exponent, Isador
Goodman, long renowned in Sydney especially for his recitals and his connection
with the Prince Edward Theatre (cinema) Orchestra. Colin Croft was totally
enraptured with the fantastic use Isador Goodman made of the piano to amuse and
entertain and, at the same time, influence musical tastes. Going backstage after
a concert to tell Goodman how much he had enjoyed it, Colin was amazed when
Goodman told him that he also enjoyed the work of the 2nd Division CP, which
apparently he had seen perform several times. The whole of the concert party got
more than a little afterglow from Colin's encounter with Isador Goodman that
night!
     Another concert party formed and active from about the time that the 2nd
Division CP first got under way was the Western Australian Lines of Communication
Area Concert Party (known as `The Walocs'), first gathered together in the middle
of 1942. Kevin Caporn, who was with them for some time (and much later in the war
with `The Islanders'), developed a wicked sense of humour during the war and has
honed it even sharper since then. He had this to say about the beginnings of the
Walocs:


	<note> quote </note>
	

      Harry Bluck, one of the original Walocs, in an echo of a fading old
comedienne recalling one of her famous love-affairs (`He threw me a rose from
between his teeth. I kept the rose and threw back his teeth!'), remembers the
time when an ageing fill-in comic was putting his all into his act during a show
for the troops manning the `big guns' - coastal defence artillery - at Rottnest
Island (just off the Western Australian coast at Fremantle). He delivered his tag 
line with such force and passion that he spat his false teeth into the lap of a
colonel sitting in the front row of the audience. In the true tradition of
vaudeville he paused until the hysterical screams of laughter from the troops had
subsided a bit, leaned forward towards the completely horrified officer, and in a
hoarse stage whisper said: `Swing on to me choppers, will ya mate? I'll pick 'em
up at interval.'
     When the 2nd Division CP `played' Rottnest in the middle of the winter of
1943 we made the trip across to the island on a lurching little boat on a bleak,
miserable and rainy day. Having inspected the hall in which we were to give the
show, we decided to set up our gear the next day for the show that night. 


</sample>
