By Alf Rattigan Individuals Get Little Help to Adjust to Economic Change, 1973-1975  

It was not until the IAC Bill had passed through both Houses of Parliament on
12 December 1973 that commissioners, associate commissioners and additional
staff could be selected. Most of these appointments had to be made quickly
because the Government had indicated that it intended to forward to the
IAC early in 1974 a number of important and wide-ranging references relating
to the primary sector of the economy. Also, before any inquiries in the
primary, mining or tertiary sectors were too far advanced it was important,
first, to get all the commissioners to agree on a common economy-wide approach
to assistance to industries and, secondly, to encourage informed public
discussion by explaining the approach, the reasons for it and its likely
effects.
  Immediately after vice-regal assent to the Act was received, the Government
appointed five members of the Tariff Board as commissioners and one other
member (Watson) as the Temporary Assistance Authority (TAA). The economic
boom made it unlikely that any matters would be referred to the TAA in the
immediate future, so Watson was also appointed a commissioner for six months
to enable him to complete several inquiries he had commenced as a presiding
member of the Tariff Board. In January Professor Alan Lloyd, an agricultural
economist at Melbourne University, and Hylda Rolfe, economist for the
Australian Wool and Meat Producers, were appointed as commissioners.
  In February I recommended that the chief of the Commission's staff (Bill
Carmichael) be appointed as a commissioner when Watson's term finished in
June. If this recommendation was accepted I intended to appoint Carmichael
as executive commissioner so that he could provide the close link I wanted
between the staff and the commissioners, and also make a substantial
contribution to the work of the commissioners. In discussing the matter
with me, Whitlam said that Carmichael's appointment was strongly opposed
by Cairns and his advisers - apparently because Carmichael was closely
identified with me and the changes which had been made in the Board's work
in the last decade. Before the question of a replacement for Watson was
settled, an important political event occurred which affected the outcome.
  The Liberal and Country Party coalition, through their control of the
Senate, forced Whitlam to get a dissolution of both Houses of the Parliament
early in April. An election of 18 May was proclaimed. The Labor Party was
anxious to get a good candidate for the sixth position on the Party's New
South Wales Senate ticket because the prospect of a candidate in that position
being elected was not very great. P.B. Westerway was selected; he was a
lecturer in government and public administration at the Sydney University,
a broadcaster on public affairs and the general secretary of the New South
Wales branch of the Labor Party. Whitlam agreed to a proposal put to him
by the New South Wales Labor Party that if Westerway was not elected, he
would be appointed as soon as possible after the election to a position
on a statutory authority. Westerway did not win a seat in the Senate; he
asked to be made a commissioner of the IAC and was appointed vice Watson. 
Whitlam considered that Westerway was well qualified to become a Commissioner 
of the IAC but I was disappointed; the appointee had obtained the position as 
a matter of political expediency; he had not been selected on the basis of 
competency.
  With Whitlam's concurrence, I set out to appoint associate commissioners
with diverse backgrounds. I had two objectives; to improve the work of the
Commission and to widen the understanding in the community of the IAC's
approach to its work. Four full-time associate commissioners were appointed.
They had the following backgrounds - editor of the Financial Review; associate
professor of agricultural economics of the University of Western Australia;
deputy commissioner of the Trade Practices Commission; commercial counsellor
of the Australian Embassy, Japan. The part-time associate commissioners
appointed in the first twelve months included four manufacturers, two graziers,
one farmer, an assistant director-general of the New South Wales Department
of Agriculture, a director of the Waite Agricultural Research Institute,
South Australia, a director of a large private marketing research
organization, and a geologist who was a private consultant in mineral
economics.
  The range of work undertaken by the Commission immediately after its
establishment can be gauged from a list of matters referred to the IAC during
its first year. In the primary sector: the dairy industry; rural
reconstruction; the apple and pear industry; the dried vine fruits industry;
bovine brucellosis and tuberculosis slaughter compensation; financing the
promotion of rural products; assistance to new land farmers in Western
Australia; potatoes and potato products; temporary assistance for the
beef-cattle industry; financing rural research; ways of reducing fluctuations
in rural incomes; harvesting and processing fish and shellfish. In the mining
sector: the gold-mining industry; taxation measures and royalty charges
affecting all mining industries. In the tertiary sector: assistance to
the performing arts; the publishing industry; the tourist accommodation
industry. In the secondary sector the Commission was heavily involved in
the tariff review but also in a number of important inquiries outside the
review, e.g. industries producing motor-vehicles; aircraft; iron and steel;
tractors; man-made fibre yarns; soap and detergents; tyres; railway and
tramway rolling stock; locomotives; textiles, clothing and footwear.
  Soon after it came into power the Labor Government set up a taskforce
headed by Coombs to report on ways to prune expenditure. Late in 1973 it
recommended that the subsidy for the use of superphosphate fertilizers in
primary industries should lapse when the period covered by the existing
legislation ran out in December 1974. In January 1974 Whitlam asked me whether
the Commission could, within a period of two to three months, examine and
report on the question of subsidizing the use of phosphate fertilizers.
He said he wanted the matter determined before the discussions to frame
the 1974-75 budget commenced. I pointed out to him that superphosphate was
used in a number of primary industries, all of which would have to be examined,
and that I would not expect such an inquiry to be completed in less than
ten months. Whitlam was very disappointed with my response. He considered
that payment of the subsidy was unjustified and that the money was needed
for other purposes. On 15 February 1973 his Cabinet decided, without any
public inquiry, to let the subsidy lapse in December 1974.
  The Cabinet decision brought a storm of protests from the farmers and
their organizations, who considered it cut across the public inquiry system
embodied in the IAC legislation. The protests continued right through 1974.
A reference on the matter was finally sent to the IAC on 29 January 1975
(and the subsidy was extended to allow time for the inquiry) but the damage
done to the Whitlam Government's relations with the farming community by
that Cabinet decision was never fully repaired.
  As the IAC commenced its work, the Government announced decisions on several
of the reports which the Tariff Board had signed late in 1973. The report
on domestic appliances and heating and cooling equipment attracted most
attention from the press, the manufacturers, and trade unions. This was
probably because of the types of goods it covered. They included `white
goods' such as refrigerators, stoves, freezers, washing machines and clothes
dryers; `shelf appliances' such as electric toasters, kettles, mixers, frying
pans, irons and shavers; `portable appliances' such as vacuum cleaners,
floor polishers, and lawnmowers, and larger equipment such as air-conditioning
and commercial refrigeration equipment and water and space heaters.
  The Board found that the local production costs for the goods were generally
more than twice those of other countries with similar standards of living.
The primary reason for the high production costs was the inefficient use
of resources. Too many producers manufactured too great a variety of products
in too many plants. Competition amongst producers was in terms of product
differentiation rather than price, and high tariffs had perpetuated this
practice by insulating the industry from import competition. At the time
the inquiry commenced, the average effective rate of duty for goods was
over 50 per cent. The Board recommended rates which would reduce the effective
rate for most of the goods to 25 per cent and for the remainder to 35 per
cent.
  The Government accepted the Board's recommendations on 24 January 1974.
Restructuring of the industry was delayed first by the economic boom and,
when that boom broke later in the year, by the imposition of temporary duties.
But when these were removed a more internationally competitive basis of
production evolved with a reduction in the number of factories and greater
specialization in manufacturing operations.
  
The inter-departmental committee on structural change reported to the
Government in February 1974. It considered that special adjustment assistance
could be justified only where a structural change `clearly in the national
interest' brought about by the Government itself was occurring or impending,
and it was clear that such change was beyond the normal adaptive capacity
of the economy, and likely to bring economic hardship or inequity to
individuals and/or firms which was too severe to be accommodated within
the generally available measures.
  The committee considered that in providing help for individuals, the major
concern should be to assist them in obtaining satisfactory employment. It
pointed out that in the context of the 25 per cent tariff-cut in July 1973,
assistance was proposed for individuals through a range of measures
(income-maintenance support, relocation grants, retraining assistance,
early-retirement benefits, special local unemployment relief grants and
family counselling services), but up to February 1974 only income-maintenance
had been asked for. The committee noted `that some of these measures were
currently under consideration in other more general contexts'. It believed
that income-maintenance was likely to provide appropriate short-term assistance
and would secure acceptance of a government decision to bring about structural
change in most cases. The committee recommended that income-maintenance
be available for up to six months and provide the individual with a weekly
amount equal to his or her average earnings in the previous six months.
  For firms in the secondary sector to be eligible for assistance, the
committee considered that, not only must the structural change have rendered
a significant separate part of the firm's assets incapable of economic
production, but also that the firm must have taken reasonable steps for
self-help which were unlikely to bring about complete adjustment. The committee
recommended that only two compensation measures be available for firms,
closure compensation and consultancy grants, and said that to widen the
range to include other measures such as loans, interest subsidies, loan
guarantees and grants (other than consultancy grants) would involve the
Government too closely in directing resources into new areas of activity
instead of simply helping to move resources out of existing areas. It believed
that firms and employees should have a choice in deciding on alternative
opportunities and that the Government should avoid becoming committed to
firms in the grey area between those able to adjust by themselves and those
which should close down. The report indicated that there was some difference
of opinion amongst members of the committee on the extent and form of the
measures which should be available to firms in secondary industry - the
Department of Secondary Industry maintained the measures should include
loans, grants etc. The committee's recommendations reflected the views
of the majority.
  The committee was of the opinion that measures already existed to facilitate
structural adjustments in the rural sector and made no recommendations
regarding that sector.
  At the policy level, the committee considered that the Government would
decide whether a particular structural change was desirable and whether
special measures were warranted - in many cases following the receipt of
a report from the IAC. At the administrative level, the committee considered
that arrangements for individuals should be handled by the Departments of
Labour and Social Security and that for firms, there was a need for a body
to determine and supervise payments to individual firms.

