By Helen Rutledge Chapter 18 Sydney in Helen's Time  

It is a strange feeling to read an account of your home town written by
a mature person looking back to her childhood from another world, decades
later, especially when that person is a writer of no ordinary skill. When
the home town is Sydney, my first thought is `How could she make it seem
so true and yet so ordinary?' My second thought is that it was so true because
it was so ordinary.
  To children and most young people, everything is noticeably ordinary.
They are so conscious of their surroundings that they do not remark on them.
It is not a case of familiarity breeds contempt, but a way of surviving.
  Later, when they go to different and new places, they `remark on' more
than they `notice'. It takes time and knowledge to appreciate what you see
- the difference between a general impression and a particular one or vice
versa. The older one gets the more capable one becomes of both noticing
and remarking because experience helps one to recognise, detect and compare,
and it cannot be helped if the first fresh feelings have disappeared with
youth.
  So, I cannot remember Sydney truly as it was when I was young because
it was just the place where we lived, and familiar things are seldom remarkable
or exciting. Its loveliness we took for granted; perhaps we had to be taught
by artists and writers becoming famous in this century, how beautiful it
is.
  The first really exciting thing to happen to Sydney in my day was the
building of the Harbour Bridge. It was an awakening and an eye-opener.
We watched the arch take shape and wondered if its designers and builders
could possibly have planned it so true that the halves of the span would
meet exactly in the middle. Unforgettable was the marvel and beauty of it
when it did. That stupendous arch was as beautiful and magical as a rainbow
or cobweb, and likewise of short duration. Once tied to its roadway, it
achieved a different kind of splendour, especially at night, but I am grateful
that I saw it 50 years ago when, pylons unfinished, it seemed skyborne over
the water.
  However, that is not a childhood memory, and if I was to recall my most
predominant impression of that early time, it was of the utter sandiness
of Sydney, not just the lovely yellow sands of the comparatively empty beaches,
but the dirty grey sand of the bush, yards and gardens.
  My life-long friend Molly Street married Guy Burnand in 1939 and went
to live in England. For various reasons, she was never able to return to
Australia until 1982. I was surprised when she remarked she could not get
over the `greening' of Sydney. I had never noticed it, or rather, I had
never thought about it. I had seen trees planted along the suburban roads
and I had seen the subdivisions take place of big properties into blocks
of land for sale. I had seen all the new houses built and the owners planting
trees and shrubs on their block. I was so aware of the bricks and hideous
tiles that I never noticed I could hardly see them any more, except when
they piled up into flats.
  Rona used to stand out as a landmark, now it is difficult to see the house
from the harbour or anywhere else. With the splendid water supply and pressure
we have today, I find I no longer think of Sydney as being sandy.

 The Comet  

I once hated dates, and having to learn those of the kings and queens of
England. Two dates I have never forgotten - 1503 and 1714; the years when
two queens died - Elizabeth and Anne. They are very useful dates for houses
and furniture and, or course, the people of their time. In my old age I
treasure dates. Sometimes it is really important to be able to `date'
accurately a doing, a happening or an object.
  My first irrefutable dates are Halley's Comet and the death of King Edward
VII. Comets ever have been considered portents of ill-omen and were greatly
feared by mankind, especially in dark ages when the moon and stars were
the only night lights. Halley's comet was the most fearful omen of all,
and legendary in that its 76-year transit meant that many people never
saw it at all and few saw it twice. Because the Norman Conquest of England
was so vividly recorded on the Bayeux Tapestry, the comet's appearance ever
since is supposed to be bad news for kings (it was indeed so for King Harold
at the Battle of Hastings and also convinced his army that they were on
the losing side). I remember so clearly being got out of bed, wrapped up
and carried on to the nursery balcony to see this wondrous sight. Because
it was said that every time the comet passed close to the sun, some of its
tail was burnt off, it was suggested that Alastair and I should bottle
a bit of its tail. No ordinary bottle was used for this purpose. It had
no neck and its cork was recessed in its base. It was the shape of those
glass paperweights that when turned upside-down send a snowstorm fluttering
on to persons or dwellings. As our bottle was green, perhaps a flower or
a tree was once enshrined in it. For years it glowed like a starboard light
in our nursery cabinet, along with other treasures such as the lead rose
leaves collected after the Leura fire. Where is it now? The day came when
we said, `How silly!' and did not attempt to rescue it when our mother turned
the day nursery into the dining-room and the cabinet and most of its contents
disappeared.
  My other vivid memory was of a day, soon after the comet had passed by,
when my brother and a friend came clattering downstairs, announcing in
cheerfully dramatic voices, `The King is dead.' Alastair and I were not
unprepared for this sad event; we had ceremoniously sealed the comet's
tail in our green bottle and, of course we knew that comets were bad news
for kings because of 1066 and all that.
  Equally memorable was a children's party of the Frazers at Caerleon, when
some of my pleasure (if there was any to be had) was spoilt because Lady
Patricia Ward, daughter of our third Governor-General, Lord Dudley, wore
a black cire satin sash on her white muslin dress, her hair tied up with
black bows and her hat had black ribbons to tie it on. She also wore black
patent leather buckled shoes (though she probably wore them all the time).
Always so royalist, I reproached my mother afterwards for a lack of respect
on my part for the late king. My mother, who like everyone else grown-up
was wearing full mourning herself, said it would have been unsuitable (such
a useful and overdone word) and it was different for Patsy Ward as she was
`official'.

 CHAPTER 19 Ginahgulla Road  

When I was young, I lived in a world with horses. My father said he was
bad at recognising people, unless he saw a man patting a horse because he
knew who the horse was. When he was courting my mother, he would take her
out in his sulky, with her sister Janet, aged eight, squeezed between them
as duenna, which may have given my mother confidence, but must have been
profoundly irritating to my father.
  When they were married my father added a brougham to his equipages. I
do not remember going out in the sulky, but I do remember the brougham.
I remember much better my grandmother's victoria, with a fur rug to spread
over our knees. The carriage horses were Peter and Paul.
  My parents bought a car before my grandparents did. Theirs was treated
much the same way as the horses and not taken out on Sunday until Janet
learnt to drive the rather fearsome Renault. Osborne, the coachman, never
got out of the habit of leaning forward going up hills to `ease the horses'.
  The Rona paddock was used by Peter and Paul, the Rona cow, our cow and
later my sister Philippa's pony. Our own paddock, in which my father kept
his polo ponies, had been sold.
  Horses did not come back into my life till I married in 1935. At Gidleigh,
my husband's property, there was still a teamster and eight fine draught
horses which took our wool to the railway. When World War II started, we
were fortunate enough to have the horses and carts to do most of the station
work, and men who knew how to use the harness.
  My brother, Alastair, had a skewbald pony called Patch. He and my father
used to ride down to Rose Bay through the scrub where Cranbrook Road is
now. We used to call it Sandy Lane. They would meet Mr Herbert Allen and
his son Dick, who lived close to Rona and who also had a paddock behind
their house, Buyuma, on Victoria Road. They would canter along the beach
together to swim at Farmer's Baths.
  In 1914, the polo ponies were sold, and the nice little groom who could
not read or write, went to the War to be killed. Alastair went to School
at Tudor House, where many of the boys had ponies, and took a pony called
Oswald.
  `They' tried to teach me to ride, but I was frightened to death and
absolutely loathed Patch, a shying little beast, and there is something
very unnerving about a leading rein, however necessary. Philippa learnt
to ride the natural way. She really did not care much for the games we played,
and though I forced her to play with dolls her heart was not in it. In due
course she was given a blue-grey shaggy pony called Bluey, who became her
best friend. Osborne, the Rona coachman, taught her to clean the bridle
with silver sand, use saddle soap and the curry comb, and oil Bluey's hooves.
Bluey was groomed all day when he was not being ridden.
  When Philippa was older she was given a lovely creamy pony which she used
to ride to Centennial Park, where she met friends, until a concrete road
was laid along Victoria Road. Bluey had been given to a cousin, Daisie Osborne
(now Tait), and she and Philippa went on to be successful breeders, especially
Daisie, and owners of racehorses. They both felt that Bluey had started
their education and their continuing delight and love of horses.
  We were geographically limited socially to places within walking distance
and the availability of an escort, as were our playmates. On special occasions
we were taken out in either a hansom cab or a four-wheeler, always, if my
preference was considered, the latter. Hansoms terrified me to death, and
I feared the horse would sit down on Victoria Road (it must have once),
or Edgecliff Hill, or worse still, the wheel would come off catching in
the tramlines. I was a timid child.
  I do not remember our mothers attempting to enjoy each other's company
while we played, nor were we noticeably supervised Some of
the gardens we had the run of were very large, and when we were wanted,
bells were rung or `coo-ees' called. So we were generally `dropped' and
`picked up'.
  My brother, Alastair, was delicate after a severe attack of rheumatic
fever and was in bed for weeks and kept quiet for months, though we were
not naturally rowdy children. He was not sent to school until he was 12
- a mistake, my mother thought, as his health improved quickly at Tudor
House. For these various reasons we were used to amusing ourselves.
  We had splendid toys that we loved, and played endless games of our own
devising.  To fill a need I invented an imaginary friend called Molly Deena.

