Literature in the market place Kate Ahearne looks at anxious moments in the book trade  

   `ANYBODY IN BUSINESS IS there to make money.' You probably
wouldn't say no to a few bob for every time you've heard that
trotted out to explain the behaviour of anyone from the corner
milk bar proprietor to the biggest transnational company. But
as a truism about business it has to be one of the most
interestingly untrue. It takes no account, for instance, of why
some families struggle to stay on the land through the hardest
of hard times, or why so many people choose to work in particular 
jobs or businesses when they could do much better financially 
elsewhere.
   If you turn your attention to the book trade, you'll find an
entire industry which operates on all sorts of motivations
other than (or as well as) the making of money.
  Take the writer - the primary producer. (And no doubt there are
dairy farmers around who will appreciate this next bit.) When
you buy a book over the counter, roughly 10 per cent of the
price goes to the author. If the book is a `remainder' (and
there's a lot of them about) the author gets nothing.
  So if you've written a book like last year's Australian
bestseller by Julia Stafford, A Taste of Life which sold 400
000 copies, you're rich. But if it's a biography of an eminent
Australian, it might sell 3000-5000 copies, unless it's one out
of the box. At an average of around $25 a pop, the writer gets
$7 500 - $11 500 (less tax and agency fees) for the two years
(minimum) during which they ate, slept and dreamt The Book. If
it's poetry and it's not by Pam Ayres or William Wordsworth,
it's probably a print run of 1000 copies or less and in many
cases it has been published by a small press which can pay
only nominal royalties or none at all.
   Still, it should be pointed out that until recent years, it
was the extremely rare Australian writer who earned a living
as an author. Ken Methold, who chairs the Australian Society
of Authors, now estimates that there could be as many as fifty.
Presumably by `writing' he means `writing, allied trades and
spinoffs' - workshops, writer-in-residencies, invitations to
read or speak, film rights, and so on.
   For those at the top of the heap there is also a range of
literary prizes to vie for - from the NSW and Victorian
Premiers' Awards ($15 000 each in the top two categories) to
the local and special-interest prizes, which are worth more in
confidence than cash. But you can't eat confidence or a fan
letter that says you have changed so-and-so's life. And
according to figures published in Australian Bookseller and
Publisher, so far this year 1924 new titles have been published, 
representing a massive 59.3 per cent increase on the same
period last year, which is worrying the hell out of some people
in the industry who read this as the overproduction which
precedes the crunch. It also leaves a lot of writers grinding
away for peanuts to produce a commodity which is a bit like
motherhood - we are all agreed it's a good thing, but are we
prepared to pay for it? Or, is it simply that writers are just
the biggest `scabs' out?
   At one end of the market (financially speaking) we are
prepared to pay - to the extent that, for example, we have
already purchased 200 000 copies of Julia Stafford's More Taste
of Life, and in the last two years we have also snapped up 80
000 of at least seven Readers' Digest titles. And on the import
side, no doubt we have fulfilled our goodly market duty towards
the 10 million copies Jackie Collins sold of Hollywood Wives.
   Actually, there's a myth that's been doing the rounds for
years (and desperately wants re-proving) that Australians are
the biggest per capita readers in the world. It's a myth that
sits unhappily with an industry which now sees itself at crisis
point.
   So what about these `middle-persons' - the publishers,
distributors and booksellers who soak up the 90 per cent of the
cost of a book which doesn't go to the author? What could they
possibly have to whinge about? Aren't they breaking even or a
whole lot better on all those titles returning that ridiculous
10 per cent to the person who's produced what we think we're
buying? Well yes, barring the amateur and non-profit or co-
operative publishers, they are, unless someone has read the
market wrong or has otherwise bungled. Or unless they have
decided that in the case of this or that book, the prestige
and/or the contribution to culture is worth it.
   But it's not as simple as that. In the past 10-15 years the
non-profit publishers have brought tremendous pressure to bear
on Australian mainstream publishing. On the one hand are
writers like Melbourne lesbian novelist `Emily George', who has
written, published and sold out several print runs of her own
novels in recent years. At the other extreme there are non-
profit publishers like Freemantle Arts Centre Press who,
despite their self-imposed limitation of publishing only
regional writers, have made an enormous impact on the big `L'
Literature end of the Australian market, which has never been
particularly lucrative anyway.

   AND THIS BRINGS US TO A strange phenomenon which seem speculiar peculiar to the book industry. Books are not like bootlaces,
bread, beer or just about any other commodity. In spite of the
threat posed by television, video and computer technology,
books remain the major repository in our society of wisdom,
knowledge, culture - call it what you like. When the Fraser
government first proposed an across-the-board indirect taxation
scheme the industry mounted a massive campaign. The facts and
figures were there all right, but the Please Don't Tax Books
campaign was heavily into emotive rhetoric. Geoffrey Blainey
went so far as to compare the proposal to a tax on sunshine.
  Not all books fall into this category of course, but enough
still do for the `special case' argument to emerge as the most
crucial whenever the book industry feels itself threatened. And
it also explains why amateur and non-profit presses are not the
only ones putting out money-losing books. Angus and Robertson
Publishers, for instance, runs a poetry list which must have
been losing money for years. Penguin consistently publishes
fiction in small print runs which cannot hope to do better than
break even. This kind of pressure applies not only to publishers, 
but to distributors in competition with co-operative ventures, 
as well as to those writers who need to think of themselves as 
professionals for bread-and-butter reasons. It also spills over 
into the media, where professional freelancers are continually 
in competition with amateurs who give their right arms to get 
into print.
   But more serious right now, if not for the writers
themselves, then for the industry, is what's happening at the
big end of the market. During the past twelve months, the
Australian industry has seen enormous change, brought about
partly by company take-overs. Collins has swallowed Dove
Communications, Rigby has virtually disappeared as a general
publisher, Pan has gobbled James Fraser. The list goes on and
on. In the same period our two largest distributors have shown
significant drops in profit.
   We now have a situation where the Australian publishing
industry is largely controlled by overseas interests, which
many observers fear are much more likely to concern themselves
with the promotion of books originated elsewhere than with what
is really, comparatively speaking, a tiny market for
Australian-originated books. Take, for instance, the recent
promotion of the American writer Victor Kiam's book, Going For
It. Kiam undertook 75 media interviews and speaking engagements
in six days. To my knowledge, no Australian book has ever been
so heavily promoted. Compare the launch of Peter Carey's first
novel, Bliss, which, according to Carey (by no means an
`unknown' at the time) was paid for, not by his publisher,
University of Queensland Press, but by himself.
   And where overseas interests are making noises about
concerning themselves with the local product, the question is
whether they can possibly have any idea about what's good for
Australians, or what Australians really want. And if they can
and do, aren't they more likely to interest themselves in
profits than in the welfare of Australian cultural life or
Australian jobs?

   EQUALLY DISTURBING IS THE FALL in value of the Australian
dollar. On the face of it, this should provide an enormous
boost to the local industry. With overseas titles zooming in
price, Australian titles, theoretically, become cheaper by
comparison - which would be hunky-dory for Australian publishers
if it weren't for the fact that most of the major publishers
are also major distributors for parent companies as well as
their own and smaller local and overseas publishers' titles.
   The devaluation of the Australian dollar has caused a 70 per
cent rise in books from the UK and 40 per cent in US titles. It
is now clear from the Australian Advisory Council on
Bibliographical Services Survey (May-July 1986) that many
libraries are able to buy only half as many books and
periodicals as they were two years ago. While most people
involved in local book production agree that Australian
libraries should be buying a much higher percentage of Australian
books, the ABCS Survey shows no signs of this happening to any
useful degree. And it is by no means clear that companies
distributing local as well as overseas books will shift the
weight of their endeavours to the local product on the strength
of what may turn out to be a hiccough. The prevalent attitude
seems to be `we'll ride it out'.
   On the other hand, many Australian publishers who have
relied for years on cheap Asian printing are now looking more
closely at Australian printers - which would be great for our
printers, had they not been caught with their technological
pants down after the several years during which the battle with
cheap off-shore printers had been fought and lost. The end
result will be to force up the price of Australian books,
dulling that theoretical edge provided by devaluation.
   Then there's the large-scale dumping of overseas remainders
and the current running battle between the Australian
Booksellers Association and the major distributors over whether
bookshops should be able to order titles direct from overseas
to avoid perceived inefficiencies in distribution. Indeed
things are so bad on the distribution front that Kevin Weldon
of the giant Weldon Hardie group is offering to help set up a
co-operative distribution house. And, of course, there is
always the age-old problem, the Big One which of all the
developed countries, Australia alone suffers - a tiny
population spread over enormous distances.
   Perhaps none of this would matter quite so much if the
Australian industry were based on the solid money-making
motivation which underlies almost every other industry. So why
do publishers like Penguin and Angus and Robertson (already in
enough competition, you might have thought, with the plethora
of non-profit publishers) bother to publish their poetry or
their piddly little first novels when they know very well that
most of them are not terrific? There's a desire in there
somewhere to do `good' (culturally speaking) and a desire quite
often to look good. A publishing house can add tone to a big
conglomerate. If Robert Holmes a Court does end up with the
Herald and Weekly Times, he will have, as well as the TV
stations, etc, a nice little book publishing and distribution
empire to add to all that art. What's it matter if you lose a
few thou' now and then? And it's all power and influence.
   Add to that the writers themselves, who are writing for
every reason under the sun. There's the deeply human need of the
once-offer to pass on the findings of a life-long passion. 

