A sort of grace in acqua profunda - the fiction of Helen Garner By Jane Cotter  

It seems Helen Garner can't miss. Her success began in 1977 with Monkey
Grip, the novel of soft fucking and heroin addiction, love and subcultural
angst.
Monkey Grip got the National Book Council Award. It hailed as a consciousness
raiser, praised for its authenticity. It shocked, it depressed, it bored,
it gripped, it was made into a film. Three stylish and relevant nouvelle
followed: the flow of superlatives from reviewers ("bewitching shape and
gleaming surface") became a flood.
Postcards is her latest, stories with the expected high polish and dead
accuracy, more experiments in relevance. Garner continues highly articulate.
She speaks for emotional shapes and corners of her generation (roughly 30-45
now) - mainly urban, postfeminist, multicultural - which hankers for
articulation of itself. Garner fans buy her books as a matter of course,
and those who can't stand her work buy it anyway in case they miss something.
She's been accused of transcribing, copying merely, the more flamboyant
or depressing habits of her generation; and she is thanked for the insights
into them. Most importantly, her style, with its pungent details and resonant
spaces, is sure; capable of sustaining itself under fire, or the dangers
of cultism; and promises further development. Be it noted that she is right
up with White when it comes to tea leaves and rancid fat: and no-one does
a better dunny.
  Her characters know their way round the furniture of their ideologies,
their suburban culture and its various alternatives (whether dope and colonic
irrigation, or Mozart and dogs in the kitchen). Such competence does not
protect, however, against moments of change. Anyone can drown in the deep
water, suffer changing relationships, loss, ideological confusion. Garner's
writing reflects - and perhaps is also a symptom of - a consistent personal
and cultural anxiety. It shows people in hard sexual worlds, unbearable
worlds with junkies, with other people's children, faced with the sheer
difficulty of achieving grace under pressure. I think there are serious
problems in her work traceable to the writer's distance, or lack of it,
from all this; but she is rightly praised at least for showing it.

  "I'm not all that worried about futures. I don't want love anyone forever.'
  `Look - don't get me wrong, he may be a scoundrel, but I really dig him
- apart from anything else, he's a fuckin' JUNKIE.'
  `He's NOT. He's off it. He got off it in Hobart.'
  We stared at each other across the table.
  Everything she knew about junkies was written on her face. I knew it too,
but at that moment I chose to deny it. I stared at her face, gritting my
teeth against the way she loved me. I looked at her thin, long fingers and
kept my eyes on them until I heard her sigh. She stood up and picked up
the coffee cups and carried them to the sink.
  Already too late, too late.
  What harsh lives we lead.

  This is Monkey Grip. Nora is already hooked on Javo, already out of her
depth. The narrative forms itself from such kitchen `sessions', ordinary,
utterly accurate; all the details of communal living, songs and cooking
and biking the hot streets to the baths, conversations, bed and kids. This
is the language in which Nora strains to read her life, to read Javo in
his restless movements - Hobart, Freycinet, Bangkok - to read her own fluxing
responses to him. The novel's insistently repetitive rhythm thus has its
base in the rhythms of Javo's addiction, but is in a way too a distillation
of all their lives:
  
  "We all thrashed about swapping and changing partners - like a very
complicated dance to which the steps had not yet been choreographed, all
of us trying to move gracefully in spite of our ignorance."

  This passage may serve as an insight to all the fiction.
  Nora tells her own story. The problem is that it's frustratingly long
and serious, particularly as Nora herself finds little in the way of
"choreography". She thinks on hints, in the I Ching, in troubling fantasies,
an acid trip; she dreams of "big airy open houses"; she has transient empathies
with others, and her daughter. Small Grace is one of the stronger characters,
wry, wise, loved, and thoroughly mucked about in spite of her clear needs.
One wonders how creative is her incessant drawing of "beautiful lady's"
with the perennial box of Derwents.
  Though smaller pieces by far, HONOUR & OTHER PEOPLE'S CHILDREN are thankfully
less urgently subjective, and show a more spacious treatment of the way
in which households break up, change, come `together' again. Frank and Kathleen
of HONOUR are trying to separate nicely, but can't relinquish the "domestic
memory", the apparel of a shared past (which includes small daughter Flo
- NB Flo). Frank's new partner, Jenny, who denied all this, is floundering.
In the kitchen the spouses yarn on, while

  "Jenny was left striving for grace, for a courteous arrangement of features
while they recited, delighted in the ring of names without meaning for her.
Frank put his arm round her bare shoulders, but she kept looking at her
beer can and fiddling it round and round, letting her curly hair fall across
her face to shield her. There was a short silence in the room, during which
Flo could be heard splattering the hose against the side wall of the house.
They had opened the door and taken down the blanket as the afternoon drew
on and the sun shifted off the concrete outside the kitchen, but the heat
was still intense."

Typically cinematic this scene, with Garner in full control of all the
elements, including Flo, and the full weight of the unspoken. Three people
at a loss in a unchoreographed situation. The narrative moves in and out
of houses and the various perspectives of the three who are trying to get
it right. Eventually there is a scene between Flo and her parents, this
time in an espresso bar. Flo is "battling for honour" in her turn:

  "I want us ALL to live together, in the same house. Can't we all go back
to Sutherland Street? I KNOW it would work! Oh, can't we?"
She wept bitterly, in floods of grief: she did not touch her face, for she
was sitting on her hands so that neither of her parents might seize one
and sway her into partiality. The tears, unwiped, splashed off her cheeks
and on to the table. The Italian waiter behind the espresso machine turned
his face away in distress, his hands still slinging to the upright handles."

What harsh lives we DO lead. There's no right, or wrong; but still it is
a strong moral pressure that Garner brings to bear. Here the child, desperate,
the (beautiful touch) Italian waiter, our own response, all simultaneously
demand relief. The writer has caused a set scene to become painfully
inevitable. HONOUR's final scene is just as inevitable. Sitting in the park
as Flo plays with dog, the two women open to each other in tentative
friendship. Flo cons them into getting on the see-saw, and the result is
an appropriately uneasy balancing image; but this reader is a bit uneasy
about its slickness. Garner is not immune from slickness.
  This then is her territory. Two, three, more people make a structure,
and when the structure shifts, it loosens, exposing people's needs through
the gaps. Children are points of insight to these gaps, and Garner attends
to the ways people use kids as litmus paper - or catalysts - when they are
confused about themselves. There is Grace waking before dawn in a strange
house - "Draw wit' me, Nora - draw wit' me"; Flo; wild little Wally who
has slept on beaches most of his life with his father - "thin and dirty
with little muscles like string and pearly down in elegant whorls along
his back-bone". Children reflect the present, they provide moments of clear
truth, and they testify to the prevailing anxiety. Someone in postcards
says "I think in an ideal world everyone would have children ...That's how
people learn to love. Kids suck love out of your bones". Put this way, that's
a large responsibility for a child.

  There are no ideal worlds, or ideal collective households. In OTHER PEOPLE'S
CHILDREN, Wally and freckled, stolid, endearing Laurel identify some hard
truths in their various relationships with the adults. Ruth, single parent,
lives with childless Scotty and rock muso Alex. The household's heyday,
when "the kids were everybody's kids" is past; Ruth's and Scotty's needs
are different and unequal, and the strain increasingly puts grace out of
reach. Particularly as the kids refuse to be idealistic.

Garner's capacity to render domestic life and its tiniest privacies gives
such pleasure of recognition that at least one reviewer has compared her
with Christina Stead, whose THE MAN WHO LOVED CHILDREN is the supreme family
novel. Here's a bit more:

  "The institution of Telling Life Stories had gone swimmingly at the old
house, once a week, in each of the bedrooms in turn: the cups of tea, the
packets of Iced Vo-Vos and Chocolate Royals, the knitting, the open fire,
the horror stories that any childhood will turn up. `My father read my mail
and found the contraceptive pills.' `He was driving so fast I thought I
could just open the door and jump out.' `When I got home from school my
mother...' `He came into the bathroom and I was in the bath with my sister
and he said, Who did it?'"

The comparison with Stead is fair comment. What Garner is less clear about
than Stead, is the sheer dangerousness of using childhood as an emotional
haven from reality, an alternative to `tackling the hard truth head on'.
Her large-scale sense of balance is flawed; and it's a problem, because
other people's children sets out to cover all that shared ground of personal
history, childhood and the seductiveness of nostalgia ("whenever Ruth washed
herself with Johnson's baby soap, she remembered when Laurel was a baby").

The men exhibit a sort of childlike defencelesness: Ruth can only hold
the odious Dennis in sleep or sickness (a shadow here of Nora and Javo);
childless Scotty looks at Madigan and sees that "something in the angle
of his leg and foot was child-like to her: Paddle shoes, free milk at
playtime." There might be limits to the pleasure the reader gets from
discovering weaknesses in others, but the characters go on diary-snooping
and trading failings. Without the strong objectivity and structural thrust
of Stead - or something like it - one wonders what holds it all together.

  This problem of overall thematic control is somewhat better addressed
in the children's bach, though it's still the delicacy and accuracy of the
writing that appeals most. Dexter and Athena's household is the most fully
drawn yet; its attractions are freshly surveyed through the eyes of teenager
Vicki, who strays in and stays:

  "Vicki loved their lavatory in the corner of the yard, its shelves made
of brick and timber stuffed with old paper-backs, broken tools, camping
gear and boxes of worn-down coloured pencils. She loved the notes they left
for each other, the drawings and silly rhymes, the embarrassing singing,
the vegetable garden, the fluster under which lay a generous order, the
rushes of activity followed by periods of sunny calm: Vicki was in love
with the house, with the family, with the whole establishment if it.
`Bunker Street is her GOD,' said Elizabeth."  

Bunker Street makes sense to Vicki; but her sister Elizabeth, who is something
in TV and very worldly, lives in a sort of warehouse with only a huge pink
bed, TV, phone, cassettes, - which DOESN'T make sense. Through Elizabeth
(who is loosely associated with the mandatory rock muso Philip), Dexter
and Athena's "establishment" is threatened by "the rough sexual world that
lives outside families".

