<sample>
	<id> G38 </id>
	


	<source> Australian Society - August 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2003 words </note>
	


	<h> Dazzling writing </h>
	


	<bl> By Helen Garner </bl>
	

Eleanor Dark's last novel, Lantana Lane, is republished this month by Virago.
Helen Garner introduces Eleanor Dark's work.

ELEANOR DARK WAS BORN IN Sydney in 1901, to a bookish and political family.
Her father was the poet and man of letters Dowell O'Reilly, who worked as
a schoolmaster and in the Commonwealth Public Service and who was briefly a
Labor MP. About her mother I have no information. The young Eleanor, according
to information provided by A K Thomson in Understanding the Novel: The Timeless
Land, one of those mysterious and useful little cribs one unearths in public
libraries, flourished intellectually from the start: she read at three,
and by seven was writing verse and stories. She was educated at a private
school and went to business college to become a stenographer. She appears
to have taken it for granted that she would become a writer; she published
her first verses at nineteen, and at twenty married Dr Eric Dark, a man
who seems always to have supported her strongly in her work and her ambitions.
  Dark is described, in Thomson's little book, as `an intensely practical
and hard-working woman', a keen gardener, a hiker and bushwalker, who designed
the family's house at Katoomba in the Blue Mountains west of Sydney, and
who with her husband made a second summer home in a cave. `A rock in the
floor was blasted away,' writes Thomson, `and the floor made of white ants'
nests. Fireplaces were made and rough furniture, and the table was a slab
of rock.'
  Dark's love for the land and her knowledge of it came from a great deal
of serious hiking and mapping of the area, activities which provided the
solid research basis of The Timeless Land and also the wonder and respect
for the ancientness of the country seen, for example, in Return To Coolami:

  ...in the gullies, through a dim green light and on soft earth that gave
  out a damp, rich smell, you might walk under tree ferns whose ancestors
  had been tree ferns before you grew legs and came to live on dry land.

  The few photographs of Eleanor Dark that I have seen, all head-and-shoulders
portraits, show her as broad-faced, with thick dark wavy hair cut shortish,
a wide but rather thin mouth in a most determined set, and very striking,
very large dark eyes which are always turned away from the camera. Her
expression is serious and private.
  LANTANA LANE IS ELEANOR DARK'S last novel. It appeared in 1959. Until
I was asked to write this introduction I had never heard of it. To most
Australians who were at high school in the 1950s, Dark was known as the author
of the fattish historical novel The Timeless Land (1941; part of a trilogy)
which we studied in fifth or sixth form. The strongest memory I had of this
book is an early scene in which an Aborigine stands on the cliffs of Sydney
Harbour (which bore for him, of course, a different name) and watches the
approach of the sailing ships carrying the first European settlers to his
land. It is a scene that the subsequent near-destruction of the Aboriginal
race makes into an image of piercing irony.
  Eleanor Dark's name returned briefly to public notice several years ago
when a television series was made of The Timeless Land. Writers are accustomed
to being passed over in the hooha that launches TV events, and Dark was
no exception; but it is hard to imagine this old woman, living in the Blue
Mountains, being much interested more than forty years after its publication
in yet another interpretation of her most popular novel as little more than
a colonial costume drama.
  The TV series, using alcohol as the metaphor for racial destruction, touched
lightly on the fatal impact of white settlement on the Aborigines, but paid
little or no attention to the damage which, as Dark points out in her novel,
greed and plunder did to the ancient land with which the Aborigines had
lived in harmony. She uses the image of rape - but rape, it seems to me,
within an already established relationship - when she says of her character
based on Governor Philip:

  He heard them crying out to her insatiably, `Give! Give!' and was aware
  of her silent inviolability which would never give until they had ceased
  to rob.

If this strikes us as modern, we may be equally struck by this account,
also from The Timeless Land, of Carangarang, elder sister of the main
Aboriginal character Bennilong and a maker of songs: she sings,

  ...but the words faded as swiftly as they had been born; smitten with
  fear of her own temerity, she glanced round apprehensively upon a ring
  of startled, hostile faces. They said nothing, but she understood their
  condemnation.

Her younger sister, too, made songs that `were not such as men might make... 
To the men she was like a faintly pricking thorn in the foot which they could
not discover.'
  The women novelists of Australia between the 1920s and the end of the
Second World War were no `faintly pricking thorns'. They dominated the
country's fiction output: Dark, Katharine Susannah Prichard, Barnard and
Eldershaw, Dymphna Cusack, Kylie Tennant, and the two most brilliant, Christina
Stead and Henry Handel Richardson, both of whom fled the place and worked
abroad for virtually their entire careers. It is the mark of the ability
of Australians to distort our own cultural history that a novelist like
Eleanor Dark, a critical and popular success for twenty years and twice
a winner of the Australian Literary Society's Gold Medal, should now be
someone whose name produces blank looks, whose books have almost all been
out of print for years, and who is omitted from the Oxford Anthology of
Australian Literature (published 1985 and by any standards a conservative
selection).
  Drusilla Modjeska's important book Exiles at Home (Angus and Robertson,1981)
has brought fresh attention to the women writers, solidly on the left and
subsequently all but forgotten, who dominated the Australian novel of their
time. Dark is one of these writers, but even in Modjeska's book she remains
a shadowy figure.
  In her early novels (Prelude to Christopher, 1934; Return to Coolami,
1936; Sun Across the Sky, 1937; Waterway, 1938) Dark was stylistically some
way in advance of her resident female contemporaries. In my fossicking among
the rare personal reports about Dark, I have picked up an impression that
her early technical adventurousness (time compression, flashback, etc) and
in particular her interest in psychology did not endear her to certain
influential supporters of social realism who were devoted to the establishment
and consolidation of a nationalistic Australian literary culture.
  She may not have found congenial the heavy stress laid on social realism
by Nettie and Vance Palmer and their network of commentators and writers,
but her novels make it abundantly clear that her political sympathies lay
with the left. In The Little Company (1945), the most explicitly political
of her novels, written during the Second World War and reissued now by Virago
with a rich and knowledgeable introduction by Drusilla Modjeska, Dark tackled
crucial questions about the meaning of war and the role of the radical and
the writer in a world whose social and political fabric was being torn apart.
She was never an activist, however, and rarely went to literary or political
functions; it was her husband's name that appeared on the Council for Civil
Liberties masthead.
  A Melbourne historian who interviewed Eleanor Dark ten years ago in his
research for a biography of one of her contemporaries on the left remarked
to me that she was `reflective, and not opinionated, unlike most of the
people I interviewed from the old left whose responses tended to the automatic.
She was easily the most impressive person I interviewed. She was a person
who was still thinking, and who was prepared, if she had no grounds for
opinion, to say nothing at all.' He described her, in her middle seventies
at that time, as `well preserved, fine-boned, without make-up, very attractive,
sitting up there in her beautiful house on the edge of the escarpment,
chain-smoking and looking out the window and thinking before she spoke'.
  But Dark and her husband were branded fellow travellers in a period when
any criticism of Australian society could bring accusations of communism.
They were so harassed for their politics in the fifties that Dr Dark's medical
practice suffered, and they were obliged to leave Katoomba where they had
long lived and worked, and move for a time to a small farming community
in Queensland.
  Then, for most of that decade, Dark's silence.
  Then, in 1959, Lantana Lane, a novel so strikingly different from her
other works as to `make one gasp and stretch one's eyes'.
  IT IS PROBABLY IMPERTINENT TO make ignorant guesses about an artist's
state of mind, but Lantana Lane strikes me as a novel written by a happy
woman. Its tone is light, lively and benevolent. Its humour is benign. Its
observations of human behaviour, while razor sharp, are affectionately knowing,
and informed with an attractive, amused tolerance. Its wit is without malice,
blackness or strain. Its feminism is no more vitriolic than a firm but gentle
chiacking of men in their self-importance and laconicism. It is not a novel
of conflict, of character development, of strain and resolution. It is a
contemplation of a particular microcosmic isolated little farming community
`round the corner from the world'. It is a book written with pleasure by
a mature artist in calm command of her craft.
  The Timeless Land, Dark has said, `necessitated a fearful lot of study
and research and, not being a scholar, I was very tired of that'. Lantana
Lane, on the other hand, clearly springs from personal experience. The only
evidence of scholarliness here, apart from Dark's superb handling of syntax,
is the easy familiarity the unnamed narrator (who employs a god-like and
gender-hiding `we') demonstrates with certain Great Works of our culture:
The Old and New Testaments, the Arthurian legends, Dr Johnson, Tennyson,
Freud and the works of Richard Wagner. These learned references are bandied
about with a breathtakingly light-handed cool, and give rise to some of
the book's most hilarious sequences.
  It's a `slow read', as they say, a wonderfully leisurely piece of writing,
as if the easeful sub-tropical climate in which the farming community lives
had affected the prose and structure of the book itself. Into her language
of syntactic formality and wide vocabulary Dark slings sudden coloquialisms
which blast the seriousness sky-high. The loveliest example of this is
the chapter called SOME REMARKS UPON THE NATURE OF CONTRAST with Special
Reference to the Habits and Characteristics of Ananas comosus and Lantana
camara and an Examination of their Economic and Psychological Effect upon
Homo Sapiens. This marvellous dissertation on the uncontrollable tropical
weed, the bushy and massive lantana, in which the scientist's calm detachment
keeps giving way to outbursts of cursing by the tormented farmer, is perhaps
the showpiece of the book, not only for its sparkling language (`the feckless
and slovenly lantana', `the stiff, tough, soldierly pineapples' - this woman
is a mistress of anthropomorphism) but because it is also a dissertation
on the epic struggle of humankind against nature, and because of the tremendous
possibilities of lantana as an image for the human unconscious.
  This last I find specially satisfying and entertaining because of Dark's
early difficulties with the Australian social realist school who turned
their backs on what it no doubt saw as the side alley of Freudianism.
  The beauty of this symbol did not strike me until a friend remarked to
me, while I was reading the book, that her husband had dismissed his own
unconscious by describing it as `a deep dark hole where I throw things
I don't want to think about, and I never see them again'. Dark's phrase
`Throw it Down in the Lantana' sprang to my mind.


</sample>
