In defence of melodrama: towards a libertarian aesthetic. By John Docker  

The [Wopples] family were now on tour among the small towns of Victoria,
and seemed to be well-known, as each member got a reception when he or she
appeared on the stage. Mr Theodore Wopples used to send his agent ahead
to engage the theatre - more often a hall - bill the town, and publish
sensational little notices in the local papers. Then when the family arrived
Mr Wopples, who was really a gentleman and well-educated, called on all
the principal people of the town and so impressed them with the high class
character of the entertainment that he never failed to secure their patronage.
He also had a number of artful little schemes which he called `wheezes,'
the most successful of these being a lecture on `The Religious Teaching
of Shakespeare,' which he invariably delivered on a Sunday afternoon in
the theatre of any town he happened to be in, and not infrequently when
requested occupied the pulpit and preached capital sermons. By these means
Mr Wopples kept up the reputation of the family, and the upper classes of
all the towns invariably supported the show, while the lower classes came
as a matter of course. Mr Wopples, however, was equally as clever in providing
a bill of fare as in inducing the public to come to the theatre, and the
adaptability of the family was really wonderful. One night they would play
farcical comedy; then Hamlet, reduced to four acts by Mr Wopples, would
follow on the second night; the next night burlesque would reign supreme;
and when the curtain rose on the fourth night Mr Wopples and the star artistes
would be acting melodrama, and throw one another off bridges and do strong
starvation business with ragged clothes amid paper snowstorms.
                       Fergus Hume, Madame Midas  

  MELODRAMA IS ONE of the most ubiquitous of modern aesthetic forms. It
flourishes in serial form today in television, in Prisoner, Dallas, A Country
Practice, Sons and Daughters, Neighbours and Days of Our Lives. It draws
comedy to it, mixing genres in programs like MASH, Cheers, Happy Days, Family
Ties or Hi de Hi. It flourished in the radio serials. It flourished and
flourishes in a different form in the cinematic language of Hollywood -
which surely now can be recognised as Renaissance-like as an historical
achievement of popular culture.
 
  In this sense, as a living, expanding, vibrant form, melodrama needs no
defending. Yet since it began its march from Paris soon after the Revolution,
taking shape in the aesthetic maelstrom in which also swirled Gothic and
Romanticism, melodrama, in terms of `high culture,' has proved valuable
only a critical swearword, a ready term of disparagement - `it's
melodramatic,' `it's verging on melodrama,' `unfortunately at certain points
it becomes melodramatic,' `by the end it became indistinguishable from a
soap.' Such terms are common in dealing not only with melodrama but with
the fiction it influenced. They provide a nearly two-centuries-old yardstick
for measuring aesthetic weakness, a critical standard of what not to do
compared to what should be in terms of the hierarchy of forms and genres
by which `high culture' orders its preferences, confers value and awards
prestige. Melodrama is usually associated with `sensation' and `popular'
fiction as not culture, literature or art at all, a rule clearly laid down
by Arthur Conan Doyle's Dr Watson, when contemplating the state of aesthetic
knowledge of a new and eccentric friend. In A Study in Scarlet (1887) Watson,
invalided from the British Army in Afghanistan, returns to London to live
on a small pension. He is introduced by a mutual friend to someone who can
help share the cost of lodgings, and at their rooms at Number 221B Baker
Street the underemployed doctor has plenty of time to study his mysterious
companion. He methodically jots down his observations, e.g. `Politics -
Feeble' and `Anatomy - Accurate but unsystematic,' and concludes that Holmes'
knowledge of `Literature' is `Nil' whereas that of `Sensational Literature'
is `immense. He appears to know every detail of every horror perpetrated
in the century.' `Literature' and `Sensational Literature,' Proper Literature
and Popular Literature - Watson is here but applying a century's conventional
wisdom; as Wilkie Collins, that master of melodramatic mystery novels (to
use Julian Symons' phrase in his Introduction to Penguin's The Woman in
White), had found to his chagrin in preceding decades, the Pall Mall Gazette
observing of The Moonstone (1868) that `a conjuror at a country fair has
as much right to prate about his art.'

  In Australia a similar distinction was and is busily at work. In his essay
in Harold Love's The Australian Stage, `Theatre, Critics and Society
1850-1890,' Ken Stewart heaps praise upon the head of colonial Victoria's
two most prominent theatre critics, James Smith and James Neild. Like a
good Melbourne `cultural elite' should, critics like Smith and Neild saw
themselves, says Stewart, as cultural missionaries for an educated, cultivated
colonial democracy. By guiding, `educating, informing and entertaining the
public about theatrical and literary matters' - for example, in providing
intellectual interpretations of `serious' plays and productions, and encouraging
audiences to see Shakespeare - they could `assist in raising the colonies
to a cultural maturity in which the whole of society might intelligently
share.' This didn't mean they were intolerant of `entertainments' like
melodrama, pantomime, burlesque, variety or sensational effects, for they
could `respond to the vitality of what they theoretically opposed as a
debasement' of true drama. In particular, Neild's guiding aesthetic theory,
his consistent dramatic credo, was one of `close representational realism,'
emphasising unity and actuality, an accurate and credible `picture.' Neild
hoped thereby to encourage in Australia `serious' theatre - a term used
by Stewart wholly uncritically.

  Neild found, however, that what actually attracted crowds to theatre was
indeed melodrama, an unfortunate state of affairs whose literary equivalent
is also generally deplored in Australian literary criticism. In `Australian
Fiction to 1920,' one of the trawling chapters in Dutton's The Literature
of Australia, John Barnes finds he can't land any `works of art' among the
Australian novels of the nineteenth century. He does say that much of Clarke's
His Natural Life is `first-rate melodrama.' Along with the melodrama, however,
the novel reveals a `moral sense, imperfectly and intermittently expressed,
which implies a deeper level of seriousness.' Melodrama for Barnes seems
to have something to do with being theatrical, extreme, and making our flesh
creep. The task of criticism is to scale off a text's use of conventions
like romance and melodrama, and the use of a contorted, sensational plot
devised for its original serial readers, in order to reveal the deeper layers
to do with the `delineation of characters in their relationships' and a
moral sense of reality: the art that might exist despite the genre, in its
interstices, against its grain. Barry Andrews also sets himself this task
when he considers the 1890s stories of Price Warung. Warung's writing
`sometimes succumbs' to those traditional weaknesses of Victorian fiction,
sentimentality and melodrama, for example, in the `rampant melodrama which
pervades every paragraph of "The Strike of '95."' Andrews calls for support
from Brian Matthews, who argues in The Receding Wave that Henry Lawson's
prose increasingly succumbs to romance and melodrama. Andrews is much more
favourable to melodrama in his introduction to Warung's Tales of the Convict
System, where he follows Barnes in saying that Warung's stories are `first-rate
melodrama,' though he thinks as such they're `period pieces,' as if melodrama
has no twentieth-century cultural history.

  Now jump from dramatic and literary criticism to television commentary.
Let's glance quickly at the `quality' Fairfax flagship The Sydney Morning
Herald's `Audio Video Television Records Guide,' which attempts to guide,
educate and inform public opinion about television so that an educated,
cultivated democracy might be achieved, in which the whole of society might
intelligently share. On one occasion in his Fifth Column, Peter Luck, well-known
TV documentary-maker, ruminated on that modern classic of melodrama (along
with The Thorn Birds), the mini-series Return to Eden. Luck is in the same
production company as Hal and Jim McElroy, producers of Eden, though he
considers himself to be on the `fact' and they on the `fantasy' end of the
TV business. He loves trying to embarrass the McElroys at parties by getting
them to tell the story of the heiress, pushed into the jaws of a crocodile,
who returns disguised (an ancient folk theme) to gain revenge on her attacker,
her husband. The story always gains sidesplitting and cocktail-spilling
laughs, but the McElroys have the last laugh, since Return to Eden has swept
the world, including Spain and Poland; has become the highest-grossing foreign
product in American TV history; is in the top ten, along with The Thorn
Birds, of the most-watched TV programs ever in the USA; and now, by popular
demand, has been expanded into a twenty-two-episode series. In Peter Luck's
`fact'-filled eyes, Return to Eden is `comedy not drama,' and he's not at
all impressed - unlike Wilkie Collins and his friend Dickens, who were -
by melodrama's fascination for popular audiences.

  So, two luminous `facts' stare out at us in the two centuries under review:
the continuing and now worldwide popularity of melodrama, and a continuing
hostility to it by those who see themselves as fostering and guarding serious,
quality art, whether it be in the theatre, in fiction, or on television.
What informs this hostility and ridicule is a paradigm, the hegemony of
a critical stance that is as unbending as an old-fashioned law of physics.

  But paradigms are made to be broken.

  In the last decade or so various welcome grounds of defence of melodrama
have appeared. In Australia, as elsewhere, there has been a growing scholarly
interest in illuminating the dark age of nineteenth-century drama as an
age of theatrical vitality, and this work of recovery connects with some
fascinating research into a nineteenth-century British popular culture of
urban ballads and music-hall songs. And in terms of debates about the
differences and interactions of `high culture' and `popular culture,' we
can grab armfuls of helpful concepts from a cultural theorist whose work
is attracting more and more interest, Mikhail Bakhtin; particularly his
critique of the hierarchy of genres and his notions of the `carnivalesque,'
of different cosmologies and conceptions concerning time and space, fate
and destiny, beauty and the body. To discuss melodrama, then, is to raise
questions about `culture' itself and the categories and oppositions by which
we conceptualise it.

 Mikhail Bakhtin: Liberator of the Lower Genres  

  I have drawn out elsewhere possible relations of Bakhtin's notion of the
carnivalesque with melodrama. Briefly, in his work on narrative in The Dialogic
Imagination and on popular festive forms in Rabelais and His World, Bakhtin
wants to rescue folk motifs and the serio-comic `lower genres' as
philisophically important. The humour of carnival as it took place in the
marketplace in early modern Europe involved inversion, World Upside Down,
the laughing at and mocking of all claims to absolute truth, including its
own. The festive abuse of the marketplace established a temporary utopian
realm of freedom, freedom from usual relations of status and authority.
The grotesqueness of carnival masks and behaviour celebrated the earthiness
of the body, the way its apertures opened onto the world, and so opposed
`high' art conceptions of the body as finished and perfect. And such grotesque
earthiness, in emphasising the body's capacity for fertility and increase,
projected, along with the games of luck and chance, prophecy and
fortune-telling, a notion of fate and destiny as finally non-tragic.
Carnivalesque cosmology sees life as including the tragic and sombre, but
as not finally bound by it, for life is always in a state of incompleteness,
of becoming, of growth and change, of transformation and metamorphosis.

  In Bakhtin's view, for a magic historical moment in early modern Europe
- in Rabelais, Shakespeare and Cervantes - `high' literature and thought
drew on and interacted with the folk spirit and forms of carnival.

