The getting of greatness By Axel Clark  

  WHATEVER happened to the international reputation of Henry Handel-Richardson?
  When the last volume in her trilogy The Fortunes of Richard Mahony appeared
in 1929, it was greeted with tremendous acclaim in the press, and became
a bestseller in England and America.
  Her first two novels, Maurice Guest and The Getting Of Wisdom, although
not great commercial successes, also received very appreciative reviews
in the English-speaking world and in Europe.
  Prominent critics said she was one of the greatest novelists of the 20th
century, and at different times she was highly praised by famous literary
figures such as John Masefield, H.G. Wells, Thomas Hardy, George Moore,
Hugh Walpole, Somerset Maugham, Dorothy Richardson and Sinclair Lewis.
  But from the 1940s onwards, English, European and American interest in
her work fell away, and now in the countries where she was famous, in the
towns and cities such as Leipzig, Strasbourg, London and Lyme-Regis, in
which she lived for many years, and some of which she used as settings for
her fiction, her name is little known, if not quite forgotten.
  Outside the few universities and other academies offering courses in
Australian literature, her work is given scant serious attention, and the
suggestion that she is a major novelist commonly meets with puzzlement
or disbelief. Only in Australia are her works widely read and subjected
to continuing serious critical discussion.
  Now Cambridge University Press has issued the first full-length study
of Richardson by a non-Australian, Karen McLeod, who teaches at Oxford
University and has written her book primarily with non-Australian readers in mind.
  She writes as a polemicist, arguing the case for an author whose work
will be unfamiliar to most of that audience. Consequently, in chapters devoted
to the discussion of individual novels she goes over ground which will
already be familiar to many Australian readers.
  Her argument in these chapters is generally cogent and her views are often
original, notably in the chapter analysing the Fortunes of Richard Mahony
as the account of a marriage, and in her continual advocacy of the view
that Richardson was essentially a European writer, not only in her first
two novels, as most critics allow, but also in her trilogy.
  But Australian readers may be more interested in the later chapters where
McLeod attempts to place Richardson on the "map of English fiction" in the
first 30 years of this century, and to explain the evaporation of interest
in Richardson's novels outside Australia.
  Even at the height of her fame Richardson did not conform to certain English
notions of what an important novelist should be and do.
  She lived and worked more or less as a recluse in England, never seeking
to cut a figure on the literary scene by moving in literary circles,
entertaining and visiting, or contributing to periodicals and literary pages.
  She did not share the predominantly upper-middle-class attitudes and tastes
of the literary set after World War I. In that period, the heyday of modernism,
she was described as "sturdily unmodern"; her novels were easy to read,
whereas Joyce, Pound and Eliot were difficult and obscure.
  In 1929 she was middlebrow: Bloomsbury, Oxford and Cambridge paid little
attention to her work.
  One reason for this neglect may have been that when she became famous
in England she was swiftly elevated to the rank of the Great Australian
Novelist by people out here who had been eagerly awaiting the coming of the
Great Australian Novel, though up until that time her work had been given
little attention in the country of her birth.
  Karen McLeod thinks that once Richardson became known as an Australian
writer, she became a peripheral figure in English literature, and serious
interest in her outside Australia faded as a result.
  McLeod also considers the obvious possibility that interest in Richardson's
novels declined mainly because they weren't particularly good.
  But she is very definite on this point: Richardson "cannot possibly be
dismissed as second-rate"; she was "a writer of classical stature - that
is to say, a writer whose work should be included as a matter of course
in any discussion of the fiction of the period."
  She does not stand out on the literary maps of the period as Conrad, Lawrence
and Joyce - the three "volcanic" novelists - stand out. But she "sits
comfortably" among the "classic writers"; her "best work" is "better" than
the best work of Arnold Bennett and Virginia Woolf, though not E.M. Forster's.
  She has the novelist's old virtues: the capacity to create characters,
and a range that "stretches from wry humour to obsessive passion, and from
broad social observation to a tragic knowledge of the individual's inescapable
need to be himself." For too long she has been paid too little attention
outside Australia, and now "she deserves to be read".
  It will be interesting to see whether the strong arguments put by
Karen McLeod in this book, together with the recent republication in England
of Richardson's first two novels, attract the attention of many new
non-Australian readers, and if so, whether she will become the subject
of serious critical debate outside Australia as she has been for several
decades inside Australia, and be given the place on the literary map which
McLeod belives she deserves.
  Some of these new readers may find the experience of reading Richardson's
work very rewarding; some may complain of prolixity and tedium, as critics
have complained ever since the publication of Maurice Guest in 1908.
  But I am prepared to bet that most of them will find the novels very
disturbing.

