A certain, gentle, humorous voice By Gina Mercer  

PATRICK White says he hopes to live to see Janet Frame with the Nobel Prize
for literature. He names her third volume of autobiography, the Envoy From
Mirror City, as one of the best books to appear in 1985.
  So what has occasioned White's unusual praise, and the high sales recorded
by the autobiographies of a fairly obscure New Zealand novelist?
  First, Frame has led a fascinating life in many ways. Some of her experiences
are the sort most of us have nightmares about, but fortunately never have
to go through. Apart from the facts of Frame's life though, these
autobiographies appeal because they are accessible and direct. There is
no sense of Frame writing from the position of "great author". No sense
of her pretentiously recording her literary development, or that of her
"inner soul", for posterity.
  Rather, a steady, straightforward voice comes off the page. One which
involves the reader irresistibly as it sets about exploring and questioning
the experiences it describes. Its tone is consistently certain, gentle
and humorous. For example:
  "I completed my first visit to a foreign land by drinking my first bottle
of Coca Cola with as much reverence as if I were sipping wine in church.
One needs to be reminded that in the late...50s Coca Cola had an aura of
magic, of promise, as a symbol to many outside the United States...of all
that was essentially American, generous, good, dollar-flavoured, new-world,
bathed in the glow of a country's morning that was not yet tarnished by
the scrutiny of daylight."
  Here Frame is taking herself back to a time of naivety, exploring her 
feelings in the 50s, yet with some illumination from her current perspective. 
She is not so much reminding us of what the 50s meant, as reminding, and wondering
at, herself.
  In her first volume of autobiography, To The IsLand (Women's Press 1984),
Frame describes her childhood in a small, depressingly conservative town
in the South Island of New Zealand. The Frame family was close-knit, poor
and different.
  An Angel at My Table (Women's Press 1984), the second volume, begins as
Janet Frame leaves home to train as a schoolteacher. It covers the period
when, between the ages of 20 and 30, she spent eight years in mental hospitals,
classified as incurably insane.
  How she got into such a situation makes horrifying and fascinating reading.
Frame also describes her sensational release from hospital only a few months
before a scheduled leucotomy.
  Her third volume, The Envoy From Mirror City, begins a few years after
this miraculous release. It is 1956 and Frame is 32 years-old. Her first
long fiction, Owls Do Cry, has been published amid high praise and controversy.
Her dream of being a writer at last seeming a real possibility, she sets
off on her first overseas journey. The journey is inevitably one of
self-exploration. But given her previous experiences, this is no ordinary
self being explored.
  In a recent interview, Frame explained that as she wrote each episode
down, she tried to take herself back to how she felt at the time. The
description of her first sexual encounter, for example, is both comic
and poignant.
  With her second love affair, the tone changes. There is greater distance
as the young Janet Frame obviously (and amusingly) felt worldly wise, and
quite "experienced" in the second encounter. In this case, El Vici, an
itinerant worker in Andorra had fallen in love with her, and was planning
a life for them which took no account of Frame the writer. 
  "I thought of the day's conversation with El Vici...and felt a chill
alarm...at the prospect of my future life...working in vineyards, or helping
in the fur shop, perhaps living in poverty, trying to take care of los 
crios... Certainly I would be living within the world of the old masters
but in a world where the cherubs cried and wet their nappies, where bunches
of grapes moved and grew and must be picked, in millions, not merely enough
to fill a bowl lit by an everlasting shaft of golden light; where dimly
lit rooms with all their wonderful play of light and shadow must be lived
in, cleaned...and made weatherproof."
  To escape El Vici, Janet Frame caught a train back to London and never
replied to his pleading postcards. She even bought a return ticket, to convince
him of her good intentions, having first checked to make sure she could
recoup her money if she didn't use the return segment! Here is an honest
and good-humoured depiction of Frame's struggle with the chronic passivity
brought on by her earlier experiences. A struggle with which most women
can identify, and from which Frame finally emerges triumphant.
  Frame's honesty and humour are what make the Envoy From Mirror City readable
and enjoyable. It is the struggle she had to undergo which makes her
autobiographies engrossing.
  One struggle Frame was obviously keen to win was that of abolishing the
image of herself as "mad writer". While in London she admitted herself
to yet another mental hospital (a brave move considering her earlier
experiences), in order to find out whether she had, or ever had had,
schizophrenia. After weeks of tests, observations, and heated debate, the
London psychiatrists decided:
  "Sir Aubrey gave the verdict. I had never suffered from schizophrenia,
he said. I should never have been admitted to a mental hospital. Any problems
I now experienced were mostly a direct result of my stay in hospital. I
smiled. `Thank you,' I said shyly, formally, as if I had won a prize."
  All those years of unnecessary suffering, and yet Frame shows no signs
of bitterness or resentment. Perhaps she is not being completely honest
here, but in this sense I doubt whether any autobiography is complete. Frame
does admit, however, to ambiguous feelings at being "stripped" of the
protection (albeit dubious), of the label "schizophrenic".
  At the end of her seven years' travel she feels able to return to New
Zealand to begin a literary mapping of her own country. The Envoy From Mirror
City is circular (who says an honest tale should have no shape?) in that
it ends, as it began, with a sea voyage. The difference is that Frame returns
home as a recognised writer. More importantly, she returns as a woman who
not only accepts, but treasures, her difference from others, and no longer
desperately seeks to "fit in".

