<sample>
	<id> G48 </id>
	


	<source> Reflection and metaphor: recent works of Alun Leach-Jones  </source>
	


	<note> 2003 words </note>
	


	<bl> by Christopher Gentle </bl>
	

Leach-Jones is often mistakenly perceived
to be a formalist because of his fascination with
pictorial problems. In fact he uses abstract
language to explore fundamental philosophical
concerns as his recent Romance of death
series illustrates.

   HAVING migrated to Australia from Britain in 1960, Alun Leach-
Jones has established himself as an important Australian artist
over the past twenty-five years. He has an impressive record of
exhibitions both in this country and overseas and has been included
in important group exhibitions and collections around the world. In
Australia he has been influential not only as a distinguished
teacher but by example and through the quality of an increasingly
large body of work that he continues to generate. It is not unusual
to see direct references in student work but it is certainly a mark
of respect when this occurs in the work of quite mature artists as
sometimes is the case.
   However there are still misconceptions about Leach-Jones's
paintings by those who fail to read beyond the first level of his
work and see him purely as a decorative colourist, concerned only
with technicalities and the formal problems of painting. Ironically, 
this is a criticism which Leach-Jones himself levels at much of 
recent Australian art. Part of the problem of interpretation can
be traced back to that period in the 1960s when `New Abstraction'
was the blanket title for a number of quite disparate young artists
who were conveniently but incorrectly grouped together under the
then popular banner of colour-field painting. Leach-Jones was among
them.
   Yet there were aspects of his painting that distinguished him
even then. The work was authoritative and the technical mastery
over the intricacy of his images bore evidence of a patience and
dedication that has remained a hallmark of his career. As Patrick
McCaughey wrote in 1973, `At a period when the notions of
professionalism assumed fetishistic importance for younger
Australian artists, Leach-Jones seemed the most professional of
them all'. He seemed also to have a grasp of and familiarity with
the concepts of current European and American movements that was
uncommon in his Australian peers. He has continued to nurture these
associations by frequently exhibiting and working abroad.
   As one acutely aware of his European beginnings he has a greater
affinity with the intensity and intellectual vigour manifested in
those arenas rather than the necessarily narrower cultural
environment in his adopted country. For, unlike many migrant
artists (and native ones for that matter), he has not fallen under
the spell of either the many geographical wonders of this ancient
and arid continent or of the local folklore, white or black. He
retains a strong sense of his own Celtic heritage and philosophies
rooted in the European tradition of the great Masters and is quick
to pay homage to Jean Dubuffet, Pablo Picasso, Pierre Bonnard and
most especially to Henri Matisse. In the late 1950s and early l960s
when the post-war Americans had such an impact on contemporary
modernist philosophy, Leach-Jones found an affinity with Hans
Hofmann and Josef Albers and inspiration in Robert Motherwell. It
is no surprise then that his work should reflect this international
outlook.
   Leach-Jones's work bears ostensibly little evidence of
Australian influence except, almost inevitably, in his colour and
light and sense of space and scale - his paintings are all large.
The sharp, wide-ranging tonal patterns and high keyed, brilliant
colour celebrated with such virtuosity are anything but Celtic,
although there is a delight in ornamental and complex pattern.
There are no soft tones, no Welsh slate-greys; in their place are
sparkling coastal blues and greens and the pinks and gold of late
Sydney afternoons.
   However, one should beware of drawing the obvious conclusion
that such references are inherent in Leach-Jones's colour because
he has never been a literal painter in that sense. For him the
figurative image must inevitably entrap the viewer, arresting the
fundamental process of communication and impeding the
interpretation of the symbol. Janine Burke, writing about Leach-
Jones in 1976, suggested in some detail that the works can be
approached on three levels: on a purely literal and associative
level which is the most readily accessible, as allegories or
pictorial parables and finally as symbols. If one is to traverse
these levels, and this is not always easy, the artist maintains
that the distraction of realist imagery is best removed. He
believes that, `If you could get rid of external reality it would
be much easier to deal directly with feeling and experience'. With
this in mind it is not difficult to see why Leach-Jones relates to
art forms other than painting. Indeed much of his inspiration comes
either directly or indirectly from composers and writers: `I see
books as a whole set of intellectual tools which keep you striving
and functioning, just like looking at other art, listening to
music, reading poetry, literature and criticism, it's just to
remind you of what the goals are, what the standards are ...' And
it is not only from the works that he draws inspiration. The
writers, poets, musicians, the individuals themselves serve as
models in their dedication, intellect and ethics.
   Although Leach-Jones is broadly regarded as an abstract painter
concerned largely with developing a difficult, formal visual
language, he sees himself simultaneously using that abstract
language to explore and express the human condition especially in
his more recent works. He contends that it is not enough to produce
`adequate decoration' no matter how skilfully. For art must carry
ideas and feelings and create dialogue to communicate
meaningfully. It signifies Leach-Jones's commitment to these
ideals that he characteristically produces work in series in which
he patiently develops and expands his ideas. The series is
completed at a stage where the concepts are overtaken or a natural
impasse is reached, a point at which development ceases. 
   On the other hand, Leach-Jones has always been ready to
experiment and never reluctant to delve into the unknown.
Consequently, there have been some quite sudden changes in his
style over the years due to the discovery of new materials and
procedures - or in direct response to environmental changes. For
instance, Leach-Jones's work was visibly affected by his move to
Sydney from Melbourne in 1977: while they maintained a classical
order these paintings broke out from the confines of the strict
regime embodied, for example, in the earlier Noumenon series. The
inhibiting rigidity of the symbols was relinquished along with the
reference to three dimensional form. The new works became freer and
higher keyed.
   In 1980 Leach-Jones was invited to live and work in Berlin as
Artist in Residence with the German Academic Exchange Service where
the groundwork for the current series of paintings was laid. The
Romance of death - the generic title for these paintings - seem an
unlikely denotation for works which are brimming over with action,
colour and light. The title is in fact Leach-Jones's esoteric
reference to a number of personal characteristics and experiences.
His perception of himself is of a melancholic and introspective
personality which he attributes to his background and heritage. He
is certainly a romantic as most artists must be, but his romance is
tinged with a melancholy and natural pessimism. He enjoys listening
to twentieth-century British music and reading poetry, Welsh poetry
in particular, which reflects this sensibility.
   It seems that Leach-Jones has reached now a stage where is more
relaxed and reflective and has gained the confidence that comes
from consistent success. That he is able to define and accept
personality traits is significant, as knowing oneself is very much
part of the art process. We are witnessing the artist maturing and
coming to terms with himself and his fundamental nature.
   In Europe the pressure of world politics and threat of the
nuclear holocaust is more acutely*accutely felt, as is the memory of
historical disasters. These events, or personal histories for
instance, might well prompt a consideration of our inevitable
mortality. This is not in itself a morbid preoccupation.
Historically, reflections on death and on life have often been
synonymous; in the work of nineteenth-century German romantic
painters and the Pre-Raphaelites it became a romantic obsession.
Leach-Jones deals with it in purely modernist terms with not a
whiff of sentimentality. The English ecclesiastical historian John
McManners argues that `the attitude of men to the death of their
fellows is of unique significance for an understanding of our human
condition ... the knowledge that we must die gives us our
perspective for living ...'. And J. D. Enright in his
introduction to The Oxford Book of Death suggests that `... to
talk at all about death is inevitably to talk about life'.
   Leach-Jones continues to be fascinated with the pictorial
problems of contemporary painting as he addresses these larger
issues and in the latest works we see the results of his
persistence in honing and refining the solutions he has developed
to marry these concerns. The biggest change in his work is his
restriction of colour essentially to the primaries and for the
first time black becomes a major element. This is in sharp contrast
to the immediately preceding works where not only are the colours
exotic but the artist also introduced ground glass, sand and a
highly reflective metal flake. Large areas of these materials were
interspersed with flat areas of paint and it is indicative of his
skill that Leach-Jones was able to bring these otherwise
unsympathetic materials together and make them work with the
painted shapes to create unified and strikingly beautiful
paintings. The reasons for using such unconventional materials lay
in his attempt to endow particular non-referential structures with
a visual strength that would, in Leach-Jones's words, `be as
powerful and arresting as a realistic image of the figure'.
   One suspects that the artist thoroughly enjoyed the challenge of
the inherent difficulties and, like all true craftsmen, has a deep
affection for his materials. It might be said that this was his
infatuation with a sequined*sequinned whore to whom he then lent
respectability*respectiability. In Romance of death no. 8 he goes
further and introduces neon into the work. It is his first attempt
to do this and although the painting is successfully resolved it
is still a somewhat tentative approach to the problem of marrying
a direct source of light with the light-reflective surface of
paint. The solution was not fully to integrate them, one over the
other as it were, but to place them side by side, the relationship
being cemented by the neon lines echoing the direction, movement
and colour of the rest of the painting. The neon lines also clearly
imply an extension of the work beyond its physical extremities, as
do the painted areas. This applies to most of the latest works,
whereas the forerunners were neatly stabilized within the frame
having their own built-in border. Now, the explosive energy which
emanates from the centre of the picture projects beyond the frame,
propelling and carrying the shard-like forms with it. The forms
were previously contained and stabilized within the picture but, in
the latest works, shapes are allowed to break through and beyond
the frame. The overall effect is one of energy and vitality. This
is enhanced by the contrasting tonal pattern and the point is
emphasized further by the use of a white outline around every
shape, giving them edges like razor blades. This device gives a
sparkling effect to the painting and at the same time drags the eye
along the edges and in sharp turns through the painting from shape
to shape. There is nothing haphazard in this: Leach-Jones is a
sophisticated creator of shapes, and the complexity of the works
encourages lengthy analysis and reflection. Despite their apparent
gaiety the recent paintings are formally severe and paradoxically
suggest an underlying disquiet, a sense of foreboding. Perhaps they reflect
the darker side of the throbbing metropolis of any great city, visually
exciting places where one is also constantly aware of danger. 
  The colours are particularly evocative in the Romance of death paintings.


</sample>
