Landscape and the Australian imagination By Bruce Clunies Ross  

After about two hundred years of settlement, white
Australians have created an urban (and suburban) civilisation
around less than half the coastline of the country. Most of the
population lives there and has done for three generations or
more, for within the confines of the coastal strip, Australia
was a rapidly urbanised country. This littoral civilisation is
predominantly outward-looking. Australians generally consider
themselves to be part of Western civilisation, and enjoy its
benefits. The problems of distance which influenced early
settlement in Australia, and can be traced in its culture, seem
to have been solved. Improvements in communications now keep
Australians in touch with the metropolitan centres of the West,
and instead of regarding their culture as a delayed reflection
of European, or latterly, American culture, they can regard it
as part of the international Western civilisation spreading
across the globe. Some Australians may feel that they have more
in common with people in New York or San Francisco, or even,
perhaps, Hamburg, Milan or London, than with the hinterland at
their backs or the rural Australia depicted in much of the
literature and painting.
   This advanced state of communications seems sometimes to
induce a certain forgetfulness and blindness. Only the
disjunction of the seasons can now account for the slight gap
between the first appearance of a style on the Cote d'Azure or
in Los Angeles, and its reappearance on Maslin's Beach, but it
is easily forgotten that only in the last twenty years - the
creatively active lives of many Australian artists now in their
prime - have cheap air travel and electronic communications
narrowed the gap between urban Australia and the rest of the
Western world. Gaps still exist between the coastal cities of
Australia and the sparsely populated hinterland, and these
may even be increasing. The excitement of suddenly catching up
with the rest of the world is inclined to blind us to the most
obvious fact about Australian geography, apparent from any map
of the country, which is that urban civilisation has a very
slender hold on the place. To argue that because most
Australians live in cities, rural images are less culturally
relevant than a cosmopolitan outlook is, besides being literal-
minded, to deny the true geography of Australia; it is to
ignore the vast hinterland, and

       the three quarters of our continent
       set aside for mystic poetry.

Most Australians may never experience this, but it is doubtful
whether their imaginations remain untouched by it. Urban
Australia might be part of Western civilisation, but it is also
where civilisation runs out. It is commonly agreed that
Australia has no ruins, but this is false. In addition to the
geological ruins in Australia, there are, around the interior
edge of the continent, within the one-inch run-off isopleth,
north of Goyder's line in South Australia, in the North-West,
and elsewhere, many historical ruins which are equally telling.
They mark the points where civilisation advanced too far and
was forced to retreat. Randolph Stow uses images of such ruins
in Tourmaline, and they give us reason to doubt whether
civilisation is a progressive movement which will conquer the
world. Beyond them, there are large areas of the Australian map
still marked "No Significant Use," which means, of course, that
they have so far resisted civilised encroachment.
   The hinterland, or wild Australia, is the source of the most
pervasive images. Even in many of the films made in the last
decade when metropolitan conceptions of Australia have been
prominent, the starring role has been taken by the great
Australian landscape. A common image in these films is of human
beings against a natural background which influences the way
they are perceived and identified, and the directors who use
these images are, of course, only picking up a traditional
Australian topos of man (or woman) in a landscape. A slightly
earlier film by a British director, Nicholas Roeg's Walkabout,
actually captures the strange distinction of Australian
geography by sharp cutting between images of urban and wild
Australia.
   There is, of course, a difference between the Australian
landscape, and the images of the place which Australians carry
around in their heads and which are refracted in Australian
art. The landscape of Australia is extraordinarily varied; art
does not aim at a scientific account of this variety in the
manner of geography. It is affected by geography, but
subjectively, with the individual's sense of place. Australian
art - notably painting, but not only painting - suggests that the
land itself is a powerful element in the common experience of
Australia. Varieties of landscape have been represented by
artists working out of particular places, like Les Murray's
poems centred on the north coast of New South Wales around
Bunyah or Thea Astley's stories set in the tropic zone of
Queensland, but not all representations of the Australian
landscape are quite as specific as these and neither of the
examples cited is merely descriptive. Les Murray's images of
Bunyah are the focus of a broad vision of Australian geography
which was already apparent in an early poem like "Noonday
Axeman," where the axeman is placed on the fringe of human
settlement, poised between the encroachment of twentieth-
century metropolitan civilisation and the silent wilderness
beyond the farms rising to the foothills. Thea Astley's
narrator in Hunting the Wild Pineapple is preoccupied with
drawing maps which are both descriptive and metaphorical. The
title of the first story in the book is enough to suggest its
mode: "North: Some Compass Readings: Eden"; all the
connotations of those words are explored in the story, both to
show how the spirit of the place has taken possession of the
characters and as metaphors to reveal their feelings and
emotional interactions.
   Murray's poem is interesting because it reminds the reader
of a central fact about Australia, which is that half the
country, or more, remains untamed, and is perhaps untameable:

      After the tree falls, there will reign the same silence
      As stuns and spurs us, enraptures and defeats us,
      As seems to some a challenge, and seems to others
      To be waiting here for something beyond imagining.
      .............................................. 
                                    It will be centuries
      Before many men are truly at home in this country ...

This is not to suggest that the inland is quite unknown, or
that isolated individuals have not been able to survive in it,
but it will never be "landscaped" on the scale of the United
States, for example. Implicit in Australia is a natural mystery
more powerful than the civilisation around its fringes. From
the beginning of white settlement, this has been somewhere
around the centre of the country, and people have disappeared
into it. Although we know more about the centre now, it is
still the "Never-Never." The mysterious untamed country is both
literally and metaphorically at the centre of Australia. It is
not surprising, therefore, that it has generated the most
persuasive and powerful images of Australian landscape, or that
it should be present in the minds - or imaginations - of
Australians who have no direct experience of it.
      There are those who deny the geographical peculiarity of
Australia, and who look at it from an essentially metropolitan
perspective. Some will deny that it will never be developed,
and they are probably right. Where exploration and agriculture
failed, tourism will succeed. People now go to look at the
mystery at the heart of Australia - and will do so
increasingly - despite the fact that tourism destroys the
very thing they go to experience. Yet tracts of the "Never-
Never" will remain useless and inaccessible to miners and
tourists for a long time yet, and it is precisely these
attributes of uselessness and inaccessibility which
characterise the ultimate image of Australian landscape. It
will always be "out where the dead men lie," beyond the reach
of civilisation.
   During the two centuries that whites have occupied the land,
their culture has evolved out of the clash between European
civilisation and antipodean geography, and the geography has
proved the more powerful. This helps to explain the prominence
of landscape images in Australian culture and the persistence
of a rural legend in an urban society. It is sometimes
suggested that a preoccupation with the land and country life
is a sign of culture in a colonial stage. This is a patronising
metropolitan misconception which rests on the assumption that
man can sustain dominion over nature. The white invasion of
Australia represents a subtle challenge to this assumption.
   To judge from the way landscape was depicted in the first
hundred years or so, the optimistic view that the land could be
humanised was strong. In painting, pastoral visions of
Australia were predominant, though literature was more
ambivalent.
   For a long time, in the minds of Europeans, Australia was a
remote place on the map; a subject for fantastic antipodean
legends and fiction. It was roughly defined by a few charts of
disconnected coastline. Those who had visited this coast mostly
found it desolate and useless; the very antipodes of European
landscapes and natural environments. The first settlers found
some of these preconceptions confirmed.
   There is an interesting resemblance between some of the
earliest visions of the country and modern Australia. A map of
civilisation in Australia (see the maps of settlement and rural
population, in Learmonth, Regional Landscapes of Australia)
would look something like the old navigators' charts; a few
disconnected strips of close settlement around the coast. The
actual lines on the early charts may not coincide in many
places with the map of civilisation, but the effect is the
same; the known, and now the civilised, lie on the outskirts of
an island-continent once unknown and still untamed.
   Remoteness, desolation, uselessness and a sense of being on
the edge of the unknown have been latent in the idea of
Australia from the beginning and they contribute to that
quality of indifference with which the environment is supposed
to confront its white inhabitants. This is a one-sided affair,
because the invaders were unable to be indifferent to the
environment. Part of their heritage was a European, and
especially English, love of landscape, and they tried to love
Australia, and sometimes succeeded, or succeeded in shaping
plots of it into something they could love.
   As Bernard Smith has shown, the earliest perceptions of
Australia were filtered through European preconceptions, and
there is plenty of evidence for this in the records of songless
birds and scentless flowers and the like. It was, as a European
scientist discovered one hundred and fifty years later,

     a matter of eyes. Mine were still English eyes, and as  
     such simply could not see Australia. English eyes have    
     set ideas about trees and about light and distances. They   
     can appreciate the jungle, because for all its exotic      
     show the jungle is only an exaggerated wood. Its trees,     
     though bizarre, are in essence what trees should            
     be - trunks supporting a leafy mass which breaks the light    
     and casts a shadow. But among the gum-trees English eyes   
     are as good as blind.... The thin grey foliage is carried 
     at the end of the branches high against the sky; the     
     fierce Australian light pours through it and floods the   
     grass, the earth, and the trunks and limbs of the trees   
     themselves, washing away the colour and leaving a         
     monotone of bright yellowish grey. In time (the process    
     in my case took a month at least) the eyes adjust          
     themselves, taking on, so to speak, a pair of               
     physiological dark spectacles which make allowance for       
     the glare and reveal the bush as it really is.

Francis Ratcliffe, a scientist dependent upon his powers of
observation, was alert to what was happening to him. It was
likewise the early scientific draughtsmen, according to
Professor Smith, who were better able to avoid European
preconceptions and produce more accurate representations of the
environment they discovered in Australia.
   But the quotation from Ratcliffe suggests that it was not
simply a matter of eyes. 

