The gang of twelve By David Brown & David Neal Sensational reporting of `show trials' has
obscured the real issues of judge and jury  


   SHOW CASE trials like those of Lindy Chamberlain, Justice
Lionel Murphy, Norm Gallagher, Brian Maher and Roger Rogerson
have placed the jury trial system at the centre of media and
public attention. Statements by jurors, politicians, judges,
academics, and journalists - in particular on the Chamberlain,
Murphy and Gallagher cases - have provoked spirited debate
about the institution dubbed, by historians `the gang of
twelve'.
   Widespread disquiet over the Chamberlain verdict led to
doubt about the ability of juries to deal with complex
scientific evidence, with an implication that such cases should
be taken away from the jury. In the overtly party political
atmosphere of the Murphy case, by contrast, criticism of the
verdict was, according to sections of the media and some
judges, a general attack on one of our most revered
institutions. In both the Gallagher and Murphy cases jurors
responded to the public controversy by giving media accounts of
their deliberations. This proved too much in some quarters: the
Director of Public Prosecutions threatened contempt proceedings
against a Sydney radio station if it broadcast further juror
statements and the Victorian government legislated against
juror disclosures. Jury trial assumed sacrosanct status and
further discussion was smothered. While it was generally agreed
that the jury was a good thing, to discuss why this might be
the case - apart from the fact that it is a centuries old
institution - became a sort of sacrilege.
   Somewhere in the sensationalism surrounding these cases the
possibility of serious discussion about the rationale for the
jury trial has been frustrated. Claims that the Murphy and
Gallagher cases were political met with sharp rejoinders that
stressed the independence of juries and the legal system in
general.
   Partly, the discussion was based on confusion about the
meaning of `political'. In the general sense of `political' -
having to do with the distribution and exercise of public power
- jury trials and the legal system are very clearly so. Legal
ideology feeds the confusion over this issue by presenting the
law as technical, value free and capable of mechanical
application.

   "The political significance of the jury trial remains as 
   great as ever. It is more important than ever to argue   
   not merely for retention, but for a radical expansion of   
   popular, democratic participation in the administration    
   of criminal justice."
   Yet the legal system is shot through with discretion at
every stage and the belief that the politics of cases like
those of Murphy and Gallagher do not effect the exercise of
these discretions is myopic. Jury trials and the legal system
must be seen as part of the political system; debates about
their operation must involve discussion of their politics and
their relationship to other social and political arrangements.
   Trial by jury is not sacrosanct It does not have
to rely simply on its longevity as justification. But in its
past lie the reasons for its continued political significance:
a past not narrowly circumscribed by legal history, but located
in political and social history, in struggles between governors
and governed over the criminal law's power of life and death.
This history - so conspicuously absent from the recent
Australian debate - leads us to call not merely for retention of
jury trial but for its expansion.

   THE first thing to be said about the great jury debate is
that it has a whiff of hypocrisy about it. Those who assert the
sanctity of the jury trial must explain why, in terms of its
frequency, jury trials are very nearly extinct.
   In New South Wales, for example, only 0.9 per cent of
`major' criminal cases are decided by juries. In nine out of
ten potential jury cases the defendant pleads guilty. The vast
majority of criminal cases never concern a jury at all; they
are dealt with by magistrates in the lower courts. This is why
we refer to Chamberlain et al as `show trials'.
  But the rarity of jury trial should not be confused with its
immense symbolic significance. Legal ideology and popular
commonsense images of the operation of the criminal justice
system derive overwhelmingly from jury trials in higher
criminal courts: `adversary justice' and `due process', the
impression of strict adherence to procedural propriety, the
battle over the exclusion of evidence, the drama of the trial,
and the solemnity and ritualism revealed in Rumpole. The
ideology of justice is constructed in such a way that the
denial of that ideology in the operation of the summary justice
production line - where the vast majority of cases are heard by
judge alone - can be accomplished with scarcely a murmur A
veritable sleight of hand occurs between the two tiers of
justice. What Doreen McBarnet in her study of British
magistrates' courts calls an "ideology of triviality" operates
in summary courts, for:

the position is turned on its head. The 98 per cent     
becomes the exception to the rule of `real law' and the    
working of the law comes to be typified not by its      
routine nature, but by its atypical, indeed exceptional       
[higher court] form. Between them the ideologies of          
triviality and legal irrelevance accomplish the            
remarkable feats of defining 98 percent of court cases       
not only as exceptions to the rule of due process, but       
also as of no public interest whatsoever.

   The demise of the jury has been accomplished by stealth
rather than by denigration or frontal attack. Paradoxically
this has been accompanied by constant affirmation of its
significance. The curtailed jury system has resulted partly
from a massive expansion of new summary (non-jury trial)
offences, and increased powers for magistrates to
deal with cases which formerly could only be tried by judge and
jury. In addition a range of specific practices - the pervasive
police `verbal', police control over pre-trial interrogation
outside effective review, plea bargaining and a host of
situational pressures (time, delay, the effective presumption
of guilt, denial of bail, etc) - combine to secure the
overwhelming number of guilty pleas upon which the criminal
justice system depends.

   THE right to trial by jury can be traced to Magna Carta,
which provided that:

no free man [sic] shall be taken and imprisoned or      
disseised of any free tenement or of his liberties or    
free customs or outlawed or exiled, or in any other way   
destroyed, nor will we go upon nor send upon him, except  
by the lawful judgement of his peers or by the law of the 
land.

   McBarnet quotes an English case from 1699 which refers to
the fundamental privilege of English citizens "to be tried by
jury, which privilege has been secured to us by our ancestors".
Seen this way the jury trial became one element in the
historical struggle between a judiciary claiming pre-
parliamentary authority grounded in the Magna Carta, and
parliament exercising its prerogative to create summary
jurisdiction by statute. Juries have stood the test of time in
that struggle - about eight centuries in England. Governments
have not liked them. They rightly thought that juries could not
be relied on to convict in certain sorts of cases. London
juries in the eighteenth century repeatedly refused to convict
the champion of liberty, John Wilkes. Juries in country areas
in the same century refused to convict for poaching. The
government responded and made poaching a summary offence. The
tactic prompted the great contemporary commentator, William
Blackstone, to lament the imminent demise of the jury.
   The English government - no believer in the sanctity of
juries - did not trust the jury system in some of its colonial
possessions, nor does it today in the case of Northern Ireland.
Withdrawal of jury trial for certain offences became one of the
factors precipitating the American revolution. The absence of
jury trial for the first forty years in New South Wales became
a sore grievance which filled the more politically serious and
astute press of early Sydney. Our forebears saw jury trial as
a fundamental political inheritance, a counter to governments
hand picking courts in which the same government brought
prosecutions, and an analogue to the right to vote (also denied
to them).
   More recently, Margaret Thatcher's government has found that
juries could not be counted on to convict its political
enemies. In 1985 an English jury acquitted the civil servant
Clive Ponting of charges under the Official Secrets Act that he
had divulged secret information about the sinking of the
Belgrano in the Falklands War. This was despite a virtual
direction from the judge that they must convict. A jury
acquitted a number of striking English coal miners charged with
riot and unlawful assembly arising out of a picket at the
National Coal Board offices. These victories came as quite a
fillip to British civil liberties groups who had seen
significant reductions in common law rights and liberties by
judges and magistrates sitting without juries during the
strike. Towards the end of the year a jury embarrassed British
security forces by acquitting several Cyprus-based British
servicemen charged with passing secret communications to the
Russians. The jury apparently believed that abuses committed by
the members of the security forces during interrogation of the
defendants had produced untrue confessions.
   These instances demonstrate the potential of juries to place
checks on "power's all intrusive claims", as the historian E.P.
Thompson has put it, not only in cases actually brought to
court, but on countless other occasions when agents of the
state forebear because they know they could not convince a
jury. The selection of jurors from the population at large, on
a transient basis, means they are much less likely to be swayed
by `reasons of state' than those holding permanent state
positions. This of course is the very reason why governments
have sought to avoid the jury by creating summary offences.
   So here is our first major point: it is important to
understand the jury in terms of politics and the organisation
of power rather than simply by reference to its practicality,
rationality, expertise, economy or efficiency as a legal
institution.
   This leads to our second major point: the significance of
the jury in terms of popular democratic participation in the
criminal justice system. Stated baldly, jurors are supposed to
apply rules of law articulated for them by the judge to the
facts of the case. Their job is also to decide what those facts
are. But such a bald statement does no justice to the
complexity of the task.
   In the first place, the distinction between the law and the
facts is notoriously fluid and often exploited by judges to
usurp further the remaining functions of the jury. Secondly, it
will often be very difficult for anyone to determine what the
facts are, especially when witnesses' accounts contradict one
another. Ultimately, arriving at the facts depends on
assessments of credibility, a task for which juries are as well
fitted as, or perhaps better fitted than any other device.
   Of course, rules of law are often complex, technical and
expressed in the arcane language of the law. The evidence given
in a trial is elicited according to the protocols of the law of
evidence and procedure, pre-trial investigatory practices,
legal ethics and etiquette, and dramaturgical devices. The
discourse produced by these protocols and practices is quite
different from popular, everyday speech.
   These factors are often quoted against juries. However,
lawyers and judges rather than juries are the source of many of
these problems. Much can be done to alter these and other
practices - denying access to transcripts, failure to exploit
new communication technology to present evidence, refusing
jurors a right to comment on or qualify the verdict, improving
representation of minorities, examining the grounds for
exclusion (such as prior criminal record), improving
remuneration, information, physical conditions, etc) which so
constrain the jury's the democratic role and keep it
subservient to the control and directions of the judiciary.

   BUT even this does not fully state the complexity of the
jury's task.  

