<sample>
	<id> G56 </id>
	


	<source> Larrikin - Autumn 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2004 words </note>
	


	<h> The great woodchip swindle </h>
	


	<bl> By Greg Buckman </bl>
	

The ALP has sold out to Tasmania's woodchip industry. On December 16 last
year, the federal minister for primary industry, John Kerin, announced the
decision on the renewal of Tasmania's woodchip licences after 1988. It gave
the woodchip companies almost everything they wanted. The government decided
to renew the licences for 15 years after 1988 with five-yearly reviews.
  
The decision was one of the most important ever to be made about the
environment in Australia. It will affect a massive area of forest both in
Tasmania and on the mainland, it involved the biggest opposition the
environment has ever had to tackle in Australia, and it was a vital test
of political attitudes in Canberra.

Nearly all the contentious national-estate forests will have logging-plans
drawn up for them as each area comes on line for the companies. These plans
will have to be sent to Canberra, and they will probably be rubber-stamped.
An export volume of 2.889 million tonnes of woodchips per annum was approved.
Although the woodchipping of crown rainforest and of a few other very
insignificant forests elsewhere in the national estate was banned, less
than one percent of the forests which the companies were asking for were
actually excluded. The premier of Tasmania Robin Gray, and the company
executives, were very pleased with the decision. New forestry operations
south of Farmhouse Creek and in the Lemonthyme Valley started last summer.
The decision does not materially affect domestic pulpwood or sawlog logging.

Many people fought hard to save some of Tasmania's wilderness forests. We
were up against very mighty opposition, much stronger than any opposition  
that conservationists had previously taken on in Australia. From the very 
start it was a David-and-Goliath battle. The battles that the environment 
movement have fought in the past, such as Fraser Island, the NSW rainforests, 
Daintree, the Gordon-below-Franklin dam and the end of commercial whaling, 
all involved a hostile state government and/or industry which was fairly 
localised or which simply proposed a new development in an area where they 
did not have any existing investment or dependence.
  
As well as taking on a hostile state government and opposition in the woodchip
issue we also took on two of Australia's largest conglomerate companies,
Petersville-Sleigh and North Broken Hill (one of the Ranger uranium partners).
Their Tasmanian woodchip operations have been going for 15 years, they earn
over $120m each year, they represent a massive investment in mills and
machinery and they directly employ more than 1300 people. We were a threat
to these companies' big profits and their very substantial corporate power.

Another significant source of opposition to conserving our forests existed
among bureaucrats in Canberra. Most of the staff in the Department of Primary
Industry and in the Department of Arts, Heritage and the Environment were
right behind the woodchippers. Ironically one of the strongest supporters
of the industry among the Canberra bureaucracy was one Robin Bryant whose
father, in the Whitlam government, had been*veen minister for Aboriginal
affairs and then minister for ACT. Canberra bureaucrats can present an
influential lobbying force which is never forced to hear the opinion of
the electorate.

The campaign against woodchipping was always a hard one to fight. We had
only about a year to fight it, in contrast to the six years that went into
the Franklin campaign. It was also a complex issue. We were confronted by
the challenge of having to learn a lot about a complicated industry in a
short time. We also had to go through the demobilising motions of making
a authoritative submission to the environmental-impact study on woodchipping.
The EIS itself, and the complex nature of the issue*ussue, often made it
difficult to mobilise public support through a clear and simple message.
Although we managed to encourage hundreds of people to make angry submissions
to the EIS, the EIS process was something the public could never totally
identify with and it made it hard for us to switch from presenting a complex
and well argued case in the EIS to making a concise and forceful message
that could be understood by the media and the public. To some extent one
could also question whether it was worth our while getting involved in the
EIS process at all. The EIS process is a farce, because it was always going
to be a whitewash. We may have been better advised to release our own
alternative EIS and to have completely boycotted the companies' EIS.

One of the most positive aspects of the campaign was the level of public
opinion we enjoyed. An opinion poll commissioned in Brisbane, Sydney and
Melbourne in October 1985 revealed that more than 80 percent of Australians
were opposed to the logging of Australia's native forests for export as
woodchips to Japan. Surprisingly, public opinion against woodchipping was
also very strong in Tasmania. In December another opinion poll revealed
that 83 perent of Tasmanian's wanted 10 percent or more of the forests sought
by the woodchip industry protected for its wilderness and recreational values.
We never enjoyed public opinion as strong as this in the Franklin campaign
- many people who wanted the dam built were hostile to woodchipping.
Woodchipping is an issue which directly affects nearly every Tasmanian.

The challenge for us now is to convert this overwhelming public opinion
into public feeling. We need to mobilise this opinion. Unfortunately we
need to reduce this public opinion to the one equation that politicians
can understand: clearfell our forests and you clearfell your votes.

The most cynical aspect of the whole woodchip decision is that it was
undemocratic. The ALP gave into the voice of an elite group of boardroom
executives who didn't even live in Tasmania and who convinced many people
that many forest workers would lose their jobs if the greenies got their
way. The reality is that ANM and Forest Resources have retrenchment plans
for hundreds of their employees despite being almost totally unaffected
by the licence decision. Decisions like these reveal how deficient the process
of democracy can be in this nation.

If democracy isn't working properly then it's mostly the fault of politicians.
The woodchip decision revealed some harsh realities about political opinion
in Canberra and in Hobart. It revealed a political apathy about wilderness
that may well be with us for a long time.

The two groups of Canberra politicians who traditionally have been very
supportive of wilderness are the Democrats and the left wing of the Labor
Party. Many other politicians have also been very supportive but the Democrats
and the left of the Labor Party have provided the greatest support.

Many Democrats took a keen interest in the woodchip issue. Early in the
campaign Senator Don Chipp went on a flight over woodchipping forests in
Tasmania; and Senator Norm Sanders maintained an uncompromising anti-woodchip
voice.

As the issue developed, the Democrats considered doing some horse-trading
over an oil-drilling bill that Gareth Evans was keen on, and which the
Democrats had previously blocked in the Senate but didn't feel strongly
about. The Democrats initially sought support for the bill in return for
a good decision on woodchips. When the negotiating became public and the
bill came before the House of Representatives well before the woodchip decision
the Democrats became worried about the propriety of horse-trading and decided
to support the bill. In the process the Democrats gave away their bargaining
power. The Democrats weren't prepared to stick their necks out to save our
forests. Similarly, when the members of the Wilderness Society went to see
the Democrats' deputy leader and heir apparent, Senator Janine Haines, she
said she had no particular feeling about woodchipping but went along with
the party line. This was a disappointing response from a possible future
leader of a party that tries to solicit green votes.

The left wing of the Labor Party, who had been instrumental in getting their
party's support for stopping the Gordon-below-Franklin Dam, was very interested
in the issue but was not prepared to stand up to the pro-woodchip forces
in the party. They relied a lot on the supposedly pro-conservation reputation
of Mr. Kerin but in the process were sold out by him. It's hard to avoid
the conclusion that both the Democrats and the left of the Labor Party,
while still having a lot of feeling for wilderness, are nowadays not prepared
to take courageous steps to preserve it. More than ever before a bold and
colourful new force is needed in Australian politics to defend the security
of our beautiful land.

When Mr. Kerin's final recommendation went to cabinet on 15 December, the
two leftwing members of cabinet, Brian Howe and Stewart West, put up a weary
fight as did Senator Gareth Evans. Environment minister Barry Cohen put
up some argument in favour of keeping the conservation vote, and Tasmania's
only cabinet member, Senator Don Grimes, went right along with Mr. Kerin.
During the debate we did receive some surprising support from parts of the
right wing of the NSW branch of the Labor Party, a right wing that's hostile
to woodchipping in NSW.

In Hobart nearly all the state branch of the Labor Party endorsed the wholesale
destruction of our forests: their policy was almost identical to the Liberals'.
Only Peter Patmore, and to a lesser extent Bob Graham and Andrew Lohrey,
gave significant support to preserving our national-estate forests.

Mr. Kerin in the end put a lot of faith in the Forestry Commission, which
is little more than a puppet of Mr. Gray and the woodchip industry. The
Forestry Commission never even tried to preserve an independent image.

The most important political aspect of this decision is that it showed that
the Labor Party and the Liberal Party have closed ranks. They might as well
write the same environment policy. When it comes to putting runs on the
board, the Liberals under Malcolm Fraseer did just as much for the environment
as Bob Hawke's Labor Party has done. The Liberals stopped the export of
sand from Fraser Island, they stopped commercial whaling in Australia, and
they established the first stages of the Barrier Reef and Kakadu national
parks and put them on the World Heritage list. Mr. Fraser also refused Mr.
Gray's request to withdraw the nomination of western Tasmania for World
Heritage listing. The Hawke government by comparison stopped the
Gordon-below-Franklin dam and proclaimed stage two of the Kakadu and Great
Barrier Reef national parks which were all 1983 election promises. The Franklin
in hindsight was a neat piece of political expediency by the Labor Party.
Both Mr. Hawke and Ken Wriedt (the leader of the opposition in Tasmania)
still put part of the blame for the Labor Party's poor performance in the
8 February state election onto the Gordon-below-Franklin dam.

Neither the Liberal Party nor the Labor Party will take a responsible stand
on Australia's wilderness. The decisions on Daintree and woodchipping have
shown that the Labor Party, like the Liberal Party, will not stand up to
hostile state governments or big business. Very very few politicians in
Canberra care about wilderness. The great weapon we have against this apathy
is public opinion. We shall have to work hard to develop that opinion.

We never appreciated how strong the pro-woodchip feeling was in Canberra.
We dropped our call for a public inquiry into the woodchip industry, believing
an inquiry would not necessarily gain us any ground. With hindsight we can
see that it would probably have unsettled the confidence of the woodchip
industry and would have given us more time to build the campaign.

We also never completely resolved the question of whether we should go for
a strident anti-woodchipping line or for a more moderate policy of no logging
in the national estate. Those who supported the moderate line, which we
eventually adopted, argued that it was more saleable than a strong line
and that a strong line was socially irresponsible and anyway wouldn't preserve
much more really natural forest in Tasmania.


</sample>
