Whither Australia's culture? - the bicentenary and beyond By Roddy McLean  

   Returning from a pilgrimage to the Tasmanian wilderness,
Roddy McLean rejoined society only to find the archetypal
expressions of community Australianness quite foreign to his
own experiences in wild Australia. Why are a sweaty marathon-
runner, an exclusive millionaire's yacht crew and an
approbatory drug salesman (of the nicotinic variety) such
powerful emblems of our national pride? What does this mean for
our collective sense of nationhood during the approaches to our
Bicentenary? And where do our natural heritage and native
cultures fit into the picture? The author probes some of these
questions and offers his vision for 1988 and beyond.

In 1988, little more than a year away, we will commence the
celebration of an event that has changed the face of a
continent. In 1788, three men-of-war, six convict ships, three
store ships and a thousand people sailed into Port Jackson to
become, in Mitchell's time-honoured phrase, the "harbingers of
mighty changes".
   To the southern continent we have brought the refinements of
European culture, the ideals of parliamentary democracy and
individual freedom (although these have come a long way since
1788), the world s most influential language, first-class
communication systems and the material benefits of one of the
globe's most affluent societies. We have also brought large
scale deforestation and environmental degradation, high rates
of species extinction, facilities that are threatened with
nuclear obliteration and, over much of the country, the
uncaring destruction of a unique human culture.
   Just what will we be celebrating in 1988? Should we be
celebrating at all?
   I am of the opinion that, if there is something to
celebrate, then it ought to be a vision of the future rather
than an echo of the past. Let's face it, we didn't get it all
right or, to be more precise, our antecedents didn't get it all
right. We made mistakes but, then, when you start life as a
repository for the undesirables of an alien land and culture it
naturally takes a while to get yourself sorted out. Australia
is still sorting itself out and the process is far from
complete.
   The theme for the 1988 bicentenary ought to be "What makes
Australians unique", but with an optimistic view to the future
rather than a backward glance to the slightly unfortunate
origins of our European culture.
   Deek's heaving chest, never-say-die legs and dripping
moustache are the marks of a great athlete and a great man. But
is he uniquely Australian? The technological brilliance and
downright guts of Bondy's America's Cup winners are legend. But
are they uniquely Australian? And Hoges, our she'll-be-right-
mate-crocodile-man-next-door-type hero, is thought of around
the world to be to Oz as Blueberry pie is to the USA. But is he
uniquely Australian? True, they are all Australians, and good
ones too. I have a lot of admiration for all of them. But how
many of them represent attributes that are unique to Australia?
The answer is ... none.

The nation's self-perception in the late 1980's is that we
recognised, a long time ago, that we possessed a cultural
cringe. Whether that interpretation was, in fact, justified is
open to strident debate but there is no doubt that it was
generally held in Australian society. In coming to a solution,
however, we went in quite the wrong direction.
   Our solution was, in essence, "beat 'em at their own game".
By and large, we belonged to a European society far-removed
from its cultural source. The accepted yardstick for cultural
development in Australia was that of Europe itself and, later,
North America. We spent far too little time on introspection or
on ascertaining the values of our native land. So we absorbed
and mimicked the culture and art forms of Europe - the
painting, the music, even the literature. Some of our
obsessions were even narrower, such as our embrace of the
British Empire - like a child to its mother's skirt.
   To prove how loyally British we were, we fell over one
another (literally) to lay down our lives on their
battlefields. We passionately learned their summer pastime -
cricket - and then beat them ... at their own game. We out-
Pommed the Poms and thought we had come of age. But we had
simply learned their games and played by their rules. Our
adulation of cricket is indicative of much of our cultural
malaise.
   Even in fairly recent times, our cultural cringe led us to
build a monstrous and magnificent structure devoted to an art
form which, once we had mastered it, would lead us onto a new
platform of national development. We would then become
respected around the world as civilised ... what? ... oh yes,
Europeans! So we built an Opera House. A fine building it may
be but, as one of Australia's most famous landmarks, I find it
sad that it was devoted to the pursuit of an art form that
bears little relevance to the real Australia, the land of
eucalypt and wattle. As Europeans, we are as entitled as any
other European society to bask in what some would see as the
glory of Europe's finest music. But are we Europeans or
Australians?

We still adhere to the cultural cringe because we are
failing to support the home-grown traditional and novel art
forms of this nation. That, of course, creates a vicious
circle. It is time that we set our own rules and looked to the
rest of the world, especially Europe and North America, to
recognise not how similar we are to them, but how different we
are. In this era of commercialised mass read American culture,
it is all too easy to be the same as the rest. We can listen to
the same mass-produced music, watch the same mass-produced
television shows or videos and eat the same mass-produced
foods. We will soon be changing from Europeans into Americans
without even realising it. But Australians .....?
   The sources of inspiration which will lead to the genesis of
a new Australian self-image are, in my opinion, twofold: our
traditional cultures and our unique natural heritage. Both are
being largely bypassed in the Bicentenary.
   Australia is not two hundred years old. Neither is its human
culture of that vintage. The origin of our black people is lost
in the mists of the Dreamtime, so distant that we cannot pin-
point it at all. Culturally, Australia is an ancient land, far
more ancient than most of Europe. We have, on our doorstep, a
people whose stories, dances, songs, outlook and whole way of
life are totally unique. The Aboriginal concept of self and
culture ties them more closely to the skin of this land than
almost any Caucasian who has lived here since 1788. They are
linked to Australia, not as a child to its mother's skirt, but
as plants to the soil. Each nourishes the other. I cannot
imagine Australia without its Aboriginal people. Can you?
   Were I an Aborigine, I would be quite insulted at the whole
concept of a Bicentenary, in truth I feel very hesitant about
it as a non-Aborigine. Australia's human culture is at least
two hundred times as old as we European descendants like to
think. But, given that the razzamatazz is going to happen
anyway. we ought to ensure that it stresses the importance of
Aboriginal culture in the creation of a new Australian
identity. 
   There is a traditional non-Aboriginal culture in Australia
which has also felt the ravages of time sapping its strength.
Based somewhat upon the folk-life of the British Isles, the
music, dance and literature of the bush has nevertheless
stamped its undoubted individuality on our cultural history.
Challenged by the passiveness of the music-hall and, later, by
the twanging whines of American country and western music, it
has nevertheless survived and is now undergoing a revival.   
Bush dances have sprung up all over the nation, in city and
country, and folk festivals have become a focal point for the
celebration of Australia's folk culture. Singer/songwriters
such as Eric Bogle and Judy Small, to name but two, have
developed and enhanced the traditions with their own
contributions to our cultural heritage. The song And the band
played Waltzing Matilda has become famous around the world as
a portrayal of Australia through the eyes of an Australian. The
rest of humanity, you see, respects us for our uniqueness.

   The next stage in the future development of Australia is the
blending of the traditional Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal art
forms, with obvious input also from modern novel and
multicultural sources. While some Aborigines may baulk at the
idea of cultural fusion, there is no doubt that non-Aboriginal
society would greatly benefit from the trading of modes of
artistic expression. Of course, this has already happened in
many instances. Xavier Herbert's classic contribution to
Australian life, Poor Fellow My Country, could never have
achieved the power it did without the author's deep love and
understanding of the Aborigines. Albert Namatjira and the
contemporary music group Gondwanaland are others that have
fused the cultural outlooks of two societies to achieve a
result that is uniquely Australian. Herbert's alter ego in Poor
Fellow My Country, Jeremy Delacy, lamented that the Whites and
the Blacks had not inter-married to produce a new uniquely
Australian hybrid race. I do not agree with him. Cultural
interchange ought to be able to occur without the necessity for
genetic interchange. I am glad that there are still tribes of
full-blood Aborigines living on their tribal lands. They will
continue to inspire us and give us unique insights into their
ways of interpreting and celebrating life, so that we can
create a new Australian culture in parallel to theirs. 
   In the context of encouraging the vitality of Australian
Aboriginal society, it is highly desirable that by the time we
reach 1988 we have in place a comprehensive and meaningful
system of Land Rights. It is only in this way that we will
establish our bona fides as a nation that has come to terms
with itself. All over the world, people chop down trees, grow
crops, farm sheep and cattle, dig out minerals, drink beer and
build cities. The Aboriginal relationship with the land,
however, is uniquely Australian. We have so much to learn from
them.
   Of course, Land Rights already exist in a meaningful sense
in some States. But in our own State, Tasmania, there are none,
and the Gray government has stated its determination to refuse
Land Rights to Tasmania's Aborigines. If this situation
persists, why should we expect Aboriginal participation in the
1988 celebrations? We may well find ourselves highly
embarrassed by their understandable antipathy to any event that
might be interpreted as a celebration of European dominance
over Australia's original inhabitants.
   In the areas where the Aborigines were exterminated or
dispersed, notably most of the highly-populated zone east of
the Great Dividing Range, the challenge is slightly different.
The Aboriginal people who lived in this region undoubtedly had
an effect on the natural landscape and ecosystems.

In the last two hundred years, much has changed. Many
natural ecosystems have been destroyed and many others are
faced with extinction or with reduction into small pockets that
are likely to be consigned to long-term extinction. The amount
of wilderness left in the east, with the exception of far north
Queensland and western Tasmania is surprisingly little.
   By 1988, we ought to have in place a national system of
wilderness reserves to ensure the long-term preservation of
original natural Australia untouched by the unsympathetic hands
of modern civilization. Wilderness areas are essential, not
only as baseline standards against which to measure the effects
of two hundred years of European settlement, but also as a
great source of inspiration to the Australian human-spirit.
That inspiration will ultimately be expressed in our art forms
and culture.
   Our native plants, animals, natural ecosystems and landscapes are
totally unique to us. Nobody else has them. Let us cherish them
for ourselves and for the world.

