For whom the bell tolls  or, hunting the media snarks By Edwin Morrisby Sixty Seconds  

There is a British television director called Anthony Thomas. He has won
a number of awards and chooses his images brilliantly but seems less concerned
with facts. You will probably remember his Death of a Princess.
  Interviewed about it he said:
  The problem with an ordinary documentary is that people don't say important
  things when the cameras are rolling. Cameras change people and they lose
  their naturalness. By using actors to say the words you end up with a
  more truthful picture.
  Which prompted The Times to devote an editorial to Mr Thomas' views on
this matter. "It exploited," the leader writer stated,
  the atmosphere of mystery and romance with which many aspects of Saudi
  society are surrounded, in order to compile a salacious detective story
  fallaciously presented as fact.
  This is not the first time such a thing has happened in British television.
During the 'sixties similar misgivings were expressed in the columns of
The Times about some of Granada's World in Action programs. Has the complaint
now spread to Australia?
  On the night of Sunday July 27th I watched 60 Minutes. One of the segments
was a report by Jeff McMullen on the aftermath of the Chernobyl disaster.
After viewing this story I wrote a letter to the program's editor.
  I began with the statement that McMullen, by positioning himself on the
parapet of what appeared to be a belvedere and announcing that he was about
to meet a secret informant, had aroused my suspicions. I went on to say
that I had filmed in every Eastern European country (including Albania)
and that I knew from first-hand experience the sorts of restrictions placed
on foreign camera crews. The minders (read KGB or its equivalent) are never
very far away, a point McMullen himself made when talking to two Ukranian
women about the disaster. I said it was very unlikely a visiting fireman
would find an informant. A resident correspondent, perhaps.
  I also queried the location of the alleged interview. I said that, although
the Dnieper was wide at Kiev, it was not so wide as to be boundless. My
guess was that the belvedere was either near Yalta or Sochi on the Black
Sea, something that was reinforced by McMullen closing the story among a
group of Young Pioneers evacuated there from Kiev.
  Where did the mysterious voice-over of the informant come from? (We never
saw him, needless to say.) I suggested it might be the tape of one of those
radio hams in contact with the West at the time of the disaster. Or,
conceivably, it might have been a Russian or Ukranian emigre in Sydney.
  In conclusion I remarked that, if my suspicions were correct, 60 Minutes
had taken some initial steps along a very slippery slope. Two days later
I had a reply from no less a person than Gerald Stone, the Executive Producer.
  
Dear Mr Morrisby,
  We note your letter suggesting, in essence, that 60 Minutes went to Actors'
Equity in Sydney to get a voice that we then pretended was a secret Soviet
source. We further note your proof that, in your experience, it would be
unlikely that any secret contact would approach a visiting fireman.
  One good working definition of paranoia is that it takes malicious fantasy
and turns it into reality. Thus, having posed your suspicions that a program
of the stature of 60 Minutes would present to its audience such a blatant
lie, you then go on to condemn us in these terms: `60 Minutes has taken
some steps along a very slippery slope.'
  The only thing that seems to be sliding, in this instance, is your powers
of reasoning. I must admit, though, your memory is still very good - that
structure was on the Black Sea. If you had listened to what McMullen was
saying, instead of concocting silly conspiracy theories, you would have
heard him state clearly that his secret source was from the area between
Kiev and Chernobyl. He further stated quite clearly that our team did not
apply to, and would not have been allowed to, visit that area. McMullen's
commentary placed us firmly in the Black Sea area where, as he stated, many
thousands of Chernobyl-Kiev area residents had been temporarily housed.
  You might be interested to know that Jeff McMullen has had three assignments
inside the Soviet Union and was in a much better position than most `visiting
fireman' to pick up contacts.
  So, next time you feel like creating conspiratorial fantasies, please
leave us out of them.
   Cordially,
  Gerald Stone
  Executive Producer  
Mr Stone doth protest too much, methinks. Fortunately, a friend of mine
taped the program.
  McMullen opens interviewing Adamov of Gosradio in Moscow. He then says:
"But listen to this secret conversation with an ordinary Russian. Was there
great panic in Kiev?"
  The unidentified man says there was. His English is good though Americanised.
He has a thick but not heavy accent. McMullen goes on to explain that he
and his crew had not been permitted into the area around Chernobyl and adds:
"We were told that about a quarter of a million people from the Chernobyl
area had been evacuated to these Ukranian towns to the south."
  Pace Gerald Stone, this does not place him "firmly in the Black Sea area"
though I will admit Odessa lies to the south of Kiev and is both a Ukranian
city and on the Black Sea. The only time McMullen places himself firmly
anywhere is in the closing sequence when he films some children singing
and says: "This group was evacuated to what they call a Young Pioneers'
Camp on the Black Sea."
  Now to the bit about the belvedere. McMullen says:
  To get away from the minders and hear uncensored comments, you've got
to find a very safe place. I've had to climb up here to get a chance to
tell you what's really going on. We've had either the KGB or local police
looking over our shoulder every time we tried to speak to Russians in public
about the Chernobyl accident ... One man who lived between the city of Kiev
and the Chernobyl reactor has taken a great risk to meet us secretly to
tell us what he's seen. We won't be showing his face because he's afraid
of the consequences for himself and for his family.
  This happened in the Soviet Union? I am incredulous. Not only would the
authorities prevent a foreign camera crew trying to talk to ordinary Russian
citizens, they would keep that crew under constant surveillance. There are
per capita 43 times as many police of one sort or another in the USSR as
there are in Australia: 43 more pairs of eyes watching every move everyone
makes. And when that crew lugged cameras, tape-recorders and gear up to
a high place overlooking the Black Sea you can be sure those eyes were there.
It is a pity the cameraman didn't zoom out to a wide shot. You would have
seen them standing somewhere below McMullen but probably out of earshot.
  This still does not solve the problem of where the voice-over of the
secret informant came from. I still stick to my "conspiratorial fantasies"
but there are a number of people who know the truth - the cameraman, the
sound recordist, the editor among them and, of course, McMullen.
  Does Gerald Stone?

 Bad Weekend  

  There is only one word to describe Anna-Maria Dell'oso's pieces in The
Sydney Morning Herald's Good Weekend magazine and that is twee. I tried
a few others on for size - mawky, gushy, vapid, maudlin, schmaltzy, banal,
prolix, etc. - but someone who calls her companion "my dearest person" deserves
twee. It is dated, I admit, but so is Ms Dell'oso's prose.
  Let us look at a few examples:
  "I decided to go north to the wuthering colds of the Orkney Islands."
Now there is no such adjective as "wuthering". Without doubt she intended
to imply that she was as au fait as the next lady with the Bronte sisters,
though I would have thought members of the Mills & Boon stable more her
mark. Wuthering Heights was set on the moors of the West Riding of Yorkshire.
While bare and sometimes windy, they are never really cold. Dampness is
their abiding feature.
  In the same article she refers to "a shabby London winter". "Shabby,"
of course, means "faded from wear or exposure" and, by extension, "contemptibly
mean or ungenerous". Neither sense can be applied to a season. Seasons
are seasons - good, bad, hot, cold, wet, dry - but not faded or ungenerous.
  On another occasion discussing the Chambers-Barlow hangings, she has this
to say: "a shabby", (correct usage this time) "helpless end that demonstrated
to plump middle-class Australia how cheap life is in an Asia which it has
so often exploited for that very reason". Is that so? Why wasn't I taught
at school about the Australian empire in Asia where coolies and other lesser
breeds were starved or worked to death so that their Australian masters
could amass great wealth and enjoy the good life?
  Later she treats us to some instant philosophy. "Animals know aggression
but violence is peculiarly human." Not true. There is such a thing as a
rogue elephant. Not to mention bears with sore heads. A type of walrus is
noted for its violent behaviour. And in the insect kingdom there have been
many instances of what can only be called cruelty by one insect to another
actually filmed.
  And what are we to make of:
  Even around the city streets we are never far from ancestral memories
of the whip and lash, that we are descended from people who never wanted
to be here.
Speak for yourself, madam. At most perhaps 10% of Australians are of some
convict descent. Seldom during Australia's first fifty years (the major
period of transportation) did the convict population comprise more than
forty per cent of the total. The ancestors of most Australians migrated
here of their own free will. They may, indeed, have not liked what they
saw but they only had themselves to blame. Not overseers.
  Ms Dell'oso can be trendy when it suits her, women's lib. trendy that
is. Writing about learning to ride a bike, she notes that "I was forced
quickly to balance in the air on pain of a thousand accidental hysterectomies"
and claims that when she fell off, it "almost induced labour pains".
Hysterectomies and labour pains? Well, you can't have one without the other,
to further muddle the metaphor.
  But she is at her best when dipping into purple prose. The bush is "a
force that blew through the organ pipes of my soul. Jagged edges, glinting
liquids, cold, high and wild - so wild it was ancestral to violence and
impassive to the fur and claw of mammalian fear." The last two lines are
meaningless as far as I can determine.
  The city, on the other hand, evokes this image: "as soulful as the crooked
back streets of Newtown on a rainy day". Soulful they are certainly not.
Mean maybe.
  Beverley Nicholls rides again.
  Yet, in all fairness to Ms Dell'oso her film criticism in The National
Times on Sunday reads much better. More controlled, at times even astringent.
Some may well see these strictures as a way of using a sledge hammer to
crack a nut, a young (she is only thirty) and defenceless nut. They would
be the gentlemen among us.
  But Ms Dell'oso does expose herself to the public each week. And willingly.
Which brings to mind that saying attributed to Harry S. Truman about heat
and kitchens.

 SBS: The Sheltered Workshop  

  In the sheltered workshop known as SBS something approaching panic set
in after the Budget Day announcement that the service was to be merged with
the ABC on January 1st, 1987. It was not so much the prospect of being absorbed
by a larger organisation but rather of having to come face to face with
the fact of professionalism and the lack of it at SBS.

