<sample>
	<id> G60 </id>
	


	<source> Social Alternatives - April 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2007 words </note>
	


	<h> A rural renaissance? Towards socialist agriculture for Australia. </h>
	


	<bl> By Geoffrey Lawrence </bl>
	

   Australian agriculture is in a state of disarray marked by
commodity price fluctuations, increasingly severe cost/price
pressures, conflicting and often contradictory government
policies, and market instability. The `family farms' are
decreasing in number and a high proportion of those remaining
are uneconomic. Poverty and pollution are as familiar as
prosperity and profit in an industry which is both economically
vulnerable and environmentally damaging.

   To date little has been done to inform the farming
community, or the general public, of the social and economic
costs of continuing with capitalist agriculture; virtually
nothing has been done in the way of examining alternatives to
the present system. Yet the future shape of agriculture and
rural society should be a topic of vital concern to those
seeking to develop a rational and humane social system in
Australia.

   It is not my intention to provide a critique of the
existing system of agricultural production but, rather, to
focus upon the possibilities for the development of a socialist
agriculture highlighting those groups which may support a major
change in agricultural policy.


	<h> Features of a Socialist Strategy </h>
	

Although there remains fundamental, and often bitter,
disagreement about the structure and operation (and, indeed,
the political likelihood) of a future socialist Australia,
there are a number of basic propositions to which most of those
who consider themselves part of the socialist movement would
agree. These include the desirability of the replacement of
the capitalist system of economic and social organisation with
a socialist system, the liberation of wage workers from what
are judged to be oppressive and exploitative conditions of
capitalist production, and the establishment of a worker state.
In an ideal-typical sense socialism has, as some of its goals:

‚2 eventual abolition of the private ownership of property
(with ownership being vested in the state);
‚2 utilisation of the so-called forces of production (technology
and knowledge) for the benefit of all;
‚2 overcoming specific problems such as environmental pollution,
unemployment, poverty, and sexual inequality (problems seen to
arise from the capitalist accumulation process and the
capitalist relations of production);
‚2 development of the capacity for worker participation and
eventual self-management in decision-making; and
‚2 removal of the unnecessary division between mental and manual
work, and between town and country.

   These goals would have to be give prime consideration in the
restructuring of agriculture and of the wider social system.
Other policies would need to address the particular problems
currently generated by capitalist agriculture.


	<h>(a) Overcoming Existing
Inequalities </h>
	

Most people would agree that in a country as rich as Australia
there should be no poverty or unemployment. Yet unemployment,
one of the major determinants of poverty, continues to grow in
rural towns and in the cities and its social effects are
widespread and profound.

   Country areas are characterised by demand deficiency
unemployment - there is simply no work available for those who
are seeking it. Unemployment in the rural occupations such as
farm labouring, shearing and property management, has
increased fourfold in the past ten years, while the number of
job vacancies has decreased by half over the same period.

   At the beginning of 1984 some 42,000 people were looking for
farm work. This corresponds to a rate of unemployment in the
rural sector of about 26% - well over double the national rate.
The situation has not improved. During 1984 a further 7,000
rural workers lost their jobs and it was predicted that, with
falling incomes in agriculture, at least another 4,000 jobs
would be lost during 1985. Over 40% of all unemployed
Australians live outside the big cities. Rural youth and
married women are two groups severely penalised by the lack of
job opportunities in rural areas. Disguised unemployment among
females has reached a level as high as 30% in some parts of
NSW.

   A radical analysis of unemployment is based upon the
realisation that capitalism requires a &quot;reserve army&quot; of 
unemployed persons who can act to dampen the effects of wage
demands, particularly in periods of capitalist expansion.
Should the unemployment problem worsen it will be imperative
for socialists to promote the desirability of work alternatives
including a shorter working week, job sharing, more acceptable
life-style options (including multiple occupancy of rural and
urban properties) and state-initiated employment
opportunities. These options will be crucial for rural
Australia where the rate of unemployment is higher, the
duration of unemployment longer, and the effects of
unemployment arguably more severe, than in metropolitan areas.

   Socialist agricultural policy would have to deal with the
problem of poverty amongst farmers. Up until this year the farm
poverty level has wavered between 15% and 20%. With
predictions by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics (BAE) of a
further erosion in farm incomes for 1985/6 it is more than
likely that one in five farmers will remain below the poverty
line. As the first step in the transition from capitalism to
socialism the small (often inefficient) farmers disadvantaged
under existing state policies could be paid an income
supplement to bring them up to a reasonable standard of living.
University of New England sociologists engaged in the Henderson
Poverty study recommended the introduction of a &quot;farm
household relief scheme&quot; to allow cash payments to farmers
whose incomes fell below the poverty line. But others have
argued that this &quot;welfare&quot; solution is out of touch with
farmers' attitudes regarding the acceptance of charity.

   One of the more sensible suggestions to aid the poor, and
ageing, farmers was proposed by a Melbourne academic. A central
funding agency would be established to purchase the farm, pay
off debts and provide*povide an annuity or pension to adult partners
who chose to live and work on the farm. The pension would be
indexed to the cost of living but be reduced by a certain
percentage on the death of either partner. In this way the farm
couple would have full control over the property until the
death of either partner, at which time the person remaining
might continue to run the property or could, while retaining
the house and a small living area, hand over the farm to this
government agency which provided the pension. Upon the death of
both partners the farm would become the property of the state.
While this proposal has gained conditional support amongst
some policy analysts, it would, as a move toward increased
state intervention in agriculture, directly challenge the
operation of free market forces in rural property exchange.
Furthermore, despite the recent rallies and political protests
of `middle' rural Australia, the non-metropolitan poor do not
have a strong voice . As one commentator noted there is &quot;little
political mileage in... (solving) country Australia's ugliest
festering problem.&quot;
   Rural, and for that matter urban, unemployment would need to
be tackled by an integrated programme of industrial
decentralisation and regional development. Urban centres,
overcrowded and economically inefficient in terms of public
utility expenditure have grown in size, not because of the
desires of workers but because of the needs of capital. Some
State governments have recognised that without population
reduction the cities will continue to produce pollution, crime
and an increasingly restrictive lifestyle for their
inhabitants. Not surprisingly, a survey of attitudes of Sydney
residents revealed that 51% those surveyed would have preferred
to live in a smaller city, or in the country. Surveys have also
shown a strong reluctance of rural dwellers to leave the
country for the city. Yet there is nothing inevitable about
the growth of cities or the movement of people from rural to
urban areas. These trends have been caused by the decision of
capitalists to locate industries where they can obtain maximum
profits. But, on the basis of the continuing social malaise of
urban centres and the obvious desires of people to move to
centres providing a better lifestyle, a socialist government
could, and should, introduce policies which aim to relocate the
population. In the Australian context this would mean the re
development of many of the country towns which have become
rundown as farmers have left the land. The socialist state,
exhibiting a higher degree of control over productive
resources, would be able to &quot;match&quot; jobs and people thereby
improving employment prospects for rural and urban dwellers
alike.

   An ambitious regional development policy may look towards
eliminating institutions such as the States, and many of the
small and inefficient local government organisations. Regional
policy, determined by elected councils of workers in the best
position to judge and co-ordinate regional and local needs,
would allow for the operation of a grass-roots system of
resource allocation. this would be an obvious way to
decentralise power and encourage participation by the rural
populace. It would aid in regional self-determination and allow
for the implementation of local solutions for local problems. A co-
ordinated development plan would ensure that suitable
industries were located where rural unemployment was a major
concern, even if some expenses were involved in subsidising
the growth of those industries. Under socialism the interests
of those currently suffering poverty and unemployment could be
placed ahead of profit criteria in the allocation of resources
and in general policy decisions.


	<h>(b) Promoting Syndication </h>
	

A coherent regional development policy embracing job-creation
schemes and devolution of state administrative powers would
only be part of the answer to the problem of rural poverty.
While assisting the poor and unemployed in rural towns it may
not solve farm poverty. So, on a broad front, the regional plan
could encourage the development of co-operatives, allowing
farmers to share skills, knowledge and equipment. Regional
bodies could provide financial assistance to those who wished
to pool their resources - that is, to help those who were
willing to join a farm syndicate. A large proportion of farmers
may not need much encouragement to take this step. Although
there are presently less than 20 full-production syndicates
operating in Australia, it appears that syndication reduces
plant capital costs, enables production increases, and reduces
average yield fluctuations. In one survey farmers who had
joined syndicates said that while they lost some individual
decision-making powers, they gained from involvement in co-
operative work and enjoyed their increased independence from
continuous on-farm duties. Syndication removed job pressure and
enabled credit borrowing at a higher level. It allowed for
rational development planning and helped to spread the risks,
and skills, of farming. Importantly, those participating found
that gains outweighed any losses - something corroborated in
a number of overseas studies. As one agricultural commentator,
not given to radical thought, has suggested, &quot; if agriculture
is to maintain its present vital role in the Australian economy
co-operation offers about the only feasible road to follow . .
. I can see no long term future in Australia for the individual
farmer who stand alone, reliant solely upon his resources of
land, capital and labour.&quot;

   For those farmers voluntarily joining such co-operative
ventures the state could underwrite any short-term adjustment
difficulties. The socialist state could, as a preliminary step
in the development of sound regional agricultural economy, aid
the co-operatives by providing seed varieties and animal types
which promised the best results. The state could selectively
discriminate between, and encourage the use of, those chemical
inputs which were least harmful to the environment. The
cost/price squeeze, presently the curse of farming, could be
averted by state purchase of machinery for co-operatives, and
the subsidisation of those pesticides and fertilisers which had
been proven safe for farm use. The state could also encourage
diversification in agriculture by promoting research, and
economic management policies, designed to develop an
ecologically sound and efficient commodity &quot;mix&quot;.

   Research funding may be re-directed toward wind and solar
generated power to meet farm energy requirements, and towards
biological control of pests and insects. Extension workers, as
cadres of the state, could promote the adoption of socially
desirable agricultural practices and engender the ideas of co-
operation among farmers. In the regional context this would lead to the
development of agricultural self-sufficiency in many products, and the
export of other products which the region, for climatic or soil reasons,
could best produce.


</sample>
