Is the old right now new? The state, the family and sexual repression in Queensland By Neil Thornton  

"Look governments can do anything, you can do anything you like."

   The mainstream New Right combines a strident affirmation of
individual freedom in the economic sphere with moral
authoritarianism, the state enforcement of morality and
especially sexual morality in defence of the traditional,
nuclear patriarchal family. In its stress on economic
individualism the Queensland Nationals' political rhetoric has
pretensions as a model for the Australian New Right, and
leaders of the Liberal and National Parties both federally and
in other states have pointed to the Queensland government's
economic pronouncements and policy initiatives as the wave of
the future.

   Yet rhetoric aside, it is evident that in their
implementation of economic policy the Queensland Nationals are
not a front runner for the New Right. There have, admittedly,
been some recent deregulatory moves, especially an assault on
the trade union movement and an apparent drive toward
deregulation of the labour market, most conspicuously displayed
in fostering the use of contract labour in the State
electricity industry. But such deregulatory flourishes have had
no impact on the Government's well entrenched developmentalism
- its `agrarian socialism' and its systematic economic
intervention by way of providing infrastructure for mining,
mineral processing and tourism. What is more, certain of the
Government's so-called `deregulatory' moves have required the
selective use of state intervention as, for instance, in the
case of the electricity industry where, although Government
policy has eroded the working conditions of employees of the
South East Queensland Electricity Board and also facilitated
the employment of contract labour, collective bargaining has
not been allowed to determine the outcome. Instead, the
Government removed the State Industrial Commission's
jurisdiction over the electricity industry, substituting
control by a creature of its own (the Electricity Authorities
Industrial Causes Tribunal) thereby retaining strategic control
by tampering with the judicial apparatus.

 The Market and the Family  

   Queensland is not a flagship for the New Right in the
economic sphere, not yet anyway. But the picture is
dramatically different if one looks at the other strand of
mainstream New Right ideology and practice, that of social
morality and especially sexual morality. Here it begins to look
as if the Queensland brand of old-fashioned moral conservatism
might soon become part of a gathering repressive wave - the old
could well become the new.

   The New Right ideal of the economy is reactionary: its aim
is to revive the kind of relatively individualist economy found
in Western nations prior to the advent of the state-centred
welfare economies of this century. New Right ideology of the
family is likewise reactionary: the ideal is to somehow
recreate the type of nuclear, patriarchal family which is
presumed to have coexisted with an earlier, pre-welfare-
capitalist economy.

   For those who are familiar
   with and have to endure the
   Queensland style of moral
   conservatism it may already
   be apparent that it represents
   an ideological model and a
   corresponding set of public
   policies which might well be
   the best thing on offer in
   Australia as a base in reality
   for the aspiring ideologues of
   an Australian New Right.

   In mainstream New Right thinking the economy and the family
are complementary: a free market economy is envisaged as
providing the most appropriate institutional context for the
healthy family life which is, in turn, most apt for sustaining
a market economy. The family is pivotal in the division of
labour and the passing on of private property; it reproduces
the work force and transmits and reinforces the preferred
social and sexual morality. Furthermore -
   The focus on the family is critical to the right. It
   personalises and privatises social and economic problems thus
   removing them from the sphere of government action and
   spending. At the same time it legitimates the use of private,
   individual solutions while still providing a structure for them
   in the institution of the family so that order, not anarchy
   prevails.
Even though, in New Right thinking, the free market system is
best able to provide the institutional setting for stable
family life, there has nevertheless arisen within contemporary
capitalist societies in the West a tide of humanism and moral
and sexual permissiveness which threatens to undermine the
cohesion of family life and weaken thereby the very foundations
of free market capitalism. Hence the need for a morally
interventionist state in order to protect family life:
   Maintaining the solidarity and cohesion of families by non-
   market means is seen as an essential prop for a free market
   economy.

   So it is that one finds in
   mainline New Right ideology
   two interconnected strands:
   individualist economic think
   ing accompanied by moral
   authoritarianism and state-
   backed moral and sexual
   repression.

 The Family, Sexual Morality and the Permissive Society  


   For the moral conservative, sexuality is a natural or God-
given, instinctual part of our lives intended primarily as a
medium for reproducing the species. Sex should be confined
within the quasi-sacred domain of the patriarchal nuclear
family: outside that realm it is illicit, socially and
economically disruptive and so properly subject to moral
repression extending to state-enforced proscriptions. Political
posturing about `individual freedom' masks an underlying
commitment to the duty of the state to make the personal
political, that is, to intervene in the so-called private or
personal sphere of conduct where and whenever necessary to
maintain the inviolability of family life.

   Social and legal developments
   which weaken the obligations
   of family life or which
   encourage sex outside
   marriage are perceived as
   tending to undermine the
   foundation of the prevailing
   social order.

   The overwhelming threat to family life (in this New Right
perspective) is the `permissive society' which was ushered in
during the sixties when in Western nations there began a period
of increasingly rapid social and personal change revolving
around the ways in which people experience and live out the
sexual side of their lives.
   To the new Moral Right, it is mainly the permissiveness of
the sixties that set in train the recent decline in traditional
values. Mrs. Thatcher is a typical exponent of this line:
   We are reaping what was sown in the sixties . . . The    
   fashionable theories and permissive claptrap set the scene   
   for a society in which the old virtues of discipline and   
   self-restraint were denigrated.
   For more than twenty years the National-dominated
governments ruling Queensland have been trying with
considerable though far from complete success to stop the
permissive tide flowing north and polluting the purer moral
waters of Queensland while the rest of Australia (with the
partial exception of Tasmania) was being inundated by the
permissive wave. Now that the moral tide is beginning to turn
against permissiveness internationally, it may well be that
here in Australia we are to see at least some currents of
Queensland's old style moral conservatism trickling down south
as they are taken up by Australia's version of the new Moral
Right.

 The Queensland Family and Sexual Conservatism  

   Queensland's sexual conservatism is a carry-over from an
earlier rural economy in which the model of personal/economic
life was the family farm. In that economy built around
pastoralism and farming the standard productive unit was the
small to medium size rural property. Rural holdings like this
were essentially family enterprises, in which production was
carried on by father and sons, supported by mother and
daughters caring for hearth and home and, at busy periods of
the year, sometimes lending a hand with the sowing or
harvesting or management of sheep or cattle. There was thus a
close, mutually supportive connection between the `productive'
economy and the domestic economy - the integrity and cohesion of
the family was essential for efficient production on the
`family farm'.
   With increasing modernisation and diversification of the
Queensland economy, the nuclear family came to have a less
decisive function in overall economic production, but for
several reasons a family-fixated conservatism has continued to
be dominant in the political culture of the state. First,
despite the relative decline of the agrarian sector,
manufacturing is still relatively undeveloped, and the middle
classes remain less significant in size and influence as
compared with the other mainland states. Secondly, the minerals
industry, though economically important, has not been labour-
intensive, and so has had only a superficial cultural impact on
Queensland. Factors such as these, then, go some way towards
explaining the cultural parochialism of Queensland.

   To these must be added the policy decision of successive
Queensland governments:

   Those governments have
   employed all the authority
   they could muster to try to
   sustain a family-oriented
   conservatism and to insulate
   Queenslanders from the trendy,
   permissive morality of
   mainland southern states.

   Senior members of National-dominated governments have been
elderly men from rural constituencies, almost invariably
steeped in provincial moralism. Sir Johannes Bjelke-Petersen,
in particular, is an authoritarian rural populist who
identifies the wishes of `the people' with the prevailing ethos
in the Nationals' rural strongholds. Those who conduct the
affairs of the state in Queensland, and especially the
inordinately influential Premier, are bent upon containing the
threats to Queensland's familial moral purity posed by urban,
southern-based permissiveness. Use of the state apparatuses in
enforcing their brand of rural morality is validated not merely
by insisting upon the harm which permissiveness causes to
traditional, family life but also by reference to the tenets of
religious fundamentalism, and by a populist appeal to the
attitudes of `the people' (which is to say some people) or to
what they like to call `community standards'.

 The State Enforcement of Sexual Morality  

   Nowhere is the Queensland
   Government's selective use
   of state intervention to
   buttress a conservative social
   and moral order more evident
   than in the areas of sexual
   morality canvassed in the
   rest of this paper - abortion,
   AIDS, contraception, child sex,
   the gay movement, pornography, 
   prostitution.

   It would require a book-length study to document fully the
systematic and persistent character of the sexual
authoritarianism practised by Queensland administrations even
over the last decade. All that it is possible to do here is to
point to the implications of this sexual repression by looking
at one or two of its more overt and worrying manifestations in
each of the areas of sexual morality just mentioned.

 Abortion  

   Abortion is seen by moral conservatives with deep religious
convictions as being against the will of God (being `murder' of
the unborn soul), as undercutting the procreative rationale of
sexual intercourse and as interfering with the customary
authority of the father. Abortion has been and continues to be
of great concern to religiously inclined adherents of the Moral
Right. For them the state is duty bound to enforce religious
precepts by intervening in family life so as to protect the
`unborn child', encourage procreation and ensure the integrity
of the family. There is a confluence between Catholic belief
and fundamentalist Protestantism on this issue. In Queensland
the Right to Life Association has for some time been extremely
active in petitioning the Queensland Government to legislate
against abortion and to close down existing abortion clinics.

   A recent notorious instance of the Queensland Government's
sexual authoritarianism was the police raiding of fertility-
control clinics in Brisbane and Townsville in May, 1985. During
the raid on the clinic in the Brisbane suburb of Greenslopes
(operated by Dr. Peter Bayliss) the police forcibly seized
20,000 patient records. In a subsequent District Court case Dr.
Peter Bayliss and Dr. Dawn Cullen were charged by the Crown
with unlawfully procuring an abortion and Dr. Bayliss was charged
with having caused grievous bodily harm. Both were acquitted on
all charges.

   These raids and the ensuing court case illustrate well how
far the Queensland Government is prepared to go in its efforts
to try to uphold an oppressive sexual morality. The raids were
the culmination of a concerted political campaign going back at
least six years. During the period of the National-Liberal
coalition (some of whose members were also members of the Right to
Life Association) there had been an attempt to bring down
legislation which would have made an abortion even more difficult
to obtain in Queensland and which proposed severe penalties for
offending women and doctors. 

