The ladies who lunch By Robyn Archer, Diana Manson, Deborah Parry, Robyn Stacey  

   FIRST, let us look at that other women's movement, which has
been growing in direct opposition to feminism. These are the
Women Who Want To Be Women, the anti-feminist activists
(sometimes frivolously dubbed as the Women Who Want To Be
Doormats); they have the active support of fundamentalist
Christian organisations, and the intellectual support of right-
wing political organisations. In Australia and the United
States, in particular, the movement is made up of extremely
competent, articulate and sophisticated women, as well as
seemingly unsophisticated, naive and artless churchwomen of
indeterminate middle age. They are internationalist in their
perspectives and political organisation, sending emissaries
from one country to another to help fight the good fight
against liberal abortion laws, pornography, liberal educational
philosophies, relaxed prohibitions on male homosexuality, and,
in their latest campaign, reproductive technologies and genetic
experimentation (for example, test-tube babies and other
techniques which involve creation of human embryos).

   They are fighting on the terrain marked out by feminism, and
in some cases using the language of women's liberation, but
their basic assumptions about women, men, sexuality and society
are the complete reverse of those of feminists. 
   At this point it's good to pause and take stock of the opposition, 
and look at the reasons why many women feel compelled to say, before
making some brave statement about how they have faced and
overcome pressures from men, `I'm no women's libber, far from
it, but ... I believe in equality, a fair go.'

   Why does feminism seem so threatening, and sometimes such an
impenetrable system of ideas, styles, ways of living that it
puts women off? And how, at the same time, does it appear to
the Women Who Want To Be Women to be part of a great government
supported conspiracy against decent living and the future of
the Christian family? What is it about feminism, or the
condition of women's lives, that makes this movement for
women's liberation seem to embody so many people's worst fears?
   The right-wing women, the Women Who Want To Be Women, share
many of the insights of feminists into women's condition, but
draw completely opposite conclusions about what is to be done.
So, for example, they will agree with radical feminists that
the root cause of women's inferior position is male sexuality
and violence, that the world is a dangerous place for a woman.
But their solution is to insist on upholding the rules of the
traditional marriage and family structure. In the traditional
respect paid to motherhood, they see women's hope for safety.
Conventional roles for women and men offer certainty for
everybody, reduce the pressure on men who feel their manhood
threatened by newly strident women, and thereby lower the
potential for sexual violence. Conventional women's roles are
important to society and civilisation, because women are the
tamers of violent men, the instillers of respect for women and
authority in their children, and the pivot of the family, that
`haven in a heartless world'. So in a very real sense they see
any analysis of the stunting effects of traditional female
roles as an attack on women's security. Theirs is a
fundamentally pessimistic view of human nature, which has us
hovering on the brink of barbarism, any change in the balance
of forces likely to precipitate us over the edge. Men's
potential for violence needs to be restrained by the virtue of
good women. `Bad' women, such as prostitutes and sexually
promiscuous girls, are thrown to the wolves as a sort of
hostage to fortune - these right-wing women often promote the
theory that although it is regrettable, prostitution is
necessary for the overall health of society because it provides
`outlets' for sexually deprived or perverted men, who would
otherwise prey on `innocent' girls and women.

Notions of innocence which should be rewarded figure prominently 
in the social analysis of these women, and surfaced particularly 
strongly in the panic over AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome). 
One of the most consistent themes in public discussion of AIDS has 
been the concern that the disease will spread into `the general 
population' - i.e. instead of killing mainly homosexual men it will 
spread to `innocent', although sexually promiscuous, heterosexuals. 
Human society is seen as comprising only the basically good and 
decent people; others are quite literaly outside society from the 
point of view of fundamentalist moralists. And therefore quite 
properly beyond the concern of the good and decent, whose own 
security is put at risk by having any dealings with them, their 
poisonous and contagious views, their life-denying lifestyles.

   It's a view of human society which has many superficial
resemblances to ecological theories about how living organisms
coexist in nature, using ideas of fine balance, the fragility
of that balance, the irreversibility of any damage done.
Perhaps that is one of the reasons why this type of reaction to
feminism has such a wide appeal, even to people not
particularly religiously oriented - the feeling of living on the
brink, of only just keeping at bay an overwhelming pessimism,
is characteristic of these times of high unemployment, nuclear
arms escalation, and worldwide social and political upheaval.
   The link with religious feelings is easy to explain. As
Andrea Dworkin says, `religion shrouds women in real as well as
magical grace', honouring motherhood, honouring submission to
the will of God, honouring obedience to clearly laid-down rules
of sexual and moral conduct. With the proviso that it only
applies to good women, religion does say that `women are
wonderful'. Women are the creators and nurturers of life - and
that, say the Women Who Want To Be Women, ought to be enough
for any womanly woman.
   And the Women Who Want To Be Women can be very astute. They
rely on ideas about female solidarity, all women sticking
together, and throw these up against the supposed selfishness
of feminists. With absolute accuracy they point out that
working conditions and wages for women are on the whole
appalling, that women in the workforce will face the double day
of paid work and housework, that they will be undervalued by
the men they work with or for, that they will be burdened by
the guilt of leaving their children with strangers, that most
areas of `women's work' in the paid workforce are deadend
jobs without much personal satisfaction. And
this is the bargain that the feminists want you to make, they
say, to give up the pleasures of a true woman's life in the
family for a life of drudgery outside.
   And on another tack, one which throws you completely off
guard if you think of these women only as puritanical
moralists, the Women Who Want To Be Women have also scored
against feminism by alleging that feminism promotes joyless,
loveless sex, or turns women against sex and men altogether.
They argue that feminism is earnest and moralistic, and in
books like The Total Woman extol feminine sexual playfulness
(within marriage, of course) as the foundation of a happy
marriage and a satisfied man.
   The key to all their perceptions of the good, and campaigns
against the bad, lies in whatever promotes traditional family
values, respect and reverence for women, and restraint of
aggressive men.
   As Andrea Dworkin put it, in her book Right Wing Women, the
movement offers women `safety, shelter, rules, form and love' in
exchange for submission and obedience to their essential
feminine natures. The movement has `succeeded in getting women
as women (women who claim to be acting in the interests of
women as a group) to act effectively in behalf of male
authority over women, in behalf of a hierarchy in which women
are subservient to men, in behalf of women as the rightful
property of men, in behalf of religion as an expression of
transcendental male supremacy. It has succeeded in getting
women to act effectively against their own democratic inclusion
in the political process, against their own civil equality,
against any egalitarian conception of their own worth.'
   So, in the United States, the campaign by right-wing women's
groups against the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) succeeded on
two main grounds. First, they argue that ERA would mean that
women would be forced into conscription into the armed forces
on the same basis as men. Second, they argued that ERA would
force women to have abortions. How did they manage to convince
a majority of voters that an amendment to the Constitution
which would have enshrined women's rights in the law of the
land would have had the reverse effect, of taking away
fundamental freedoms from women?
   Basically, they were successful by arguing that the only
guarantee of women's rights is a strong family-based society.
They argued that the state intrudes on people's freedoms, and
therefore any state-supported campaign for women's equality is
just another way for the state to take control away from
families. If some selfish women campaigning for abortion rights
succeed in repealing the laws against abortion, and having
their right to abortion written into the law, it's just a short
step further to total control of women's reproductive lives; a
right to abortion will turn into compulsory abortion.

  

   It is fascinating, but chilling too, to see how in the
political thinking of the Women Who Want To Be Women,
feminists - who think of themselves as being in opposition to
state control of women's lives, male control of women's lives,
church or medical control of women's lives - loom up as the
causes of the oppression of women, the allies and agents of the
state. And how the very act of analysing a problem somehow
creates that problem: if feminists point out how marriage is
often a state of unhappiness for women, they are blamed for
that state of affairs. If feminists campaign for better
treatment and childcare facilities for single mothers and their
children, they are accused of forcing women into dependence on
the state. In the thinking of the right-wing movement,
feminists create the problems by suggesting that there are
alternative ways of organising society, which do not require
men and women to conform to the roles laid down for them in the
traditional family structure.
   Far removed from the traditional values of the Women Who
Want To Be Women are the Ladies Who Lunch, the women of leisure
who are the apostles of an exaggerated ideal of femininity,
dedicated to fashion, style and narcissism. They are impatient
with the `stridency' of feminism, bored with the effort of hard
thinking about the position of women; cynical about the motives
of women who campaign for the rights of other women; and above
all, determined to preserve an ideal of femininity which is all
about being clever, sexy, and manipulative. They deplore the
ugliness of what they think is a `feminist look' - like not
shaving your legs, or not wearing makeup. Although they are not
in any sense an organised movement, their influence is great,
because in a confused sort of way most women's magazines are
speaking their language, while at the same time putting out a
modified version of self-determination inspired by feminism.

   A note on language: feminism has been fighting on the
linguistic front since the beginning. One of the earliest
distinctions made was between `lady' and `woman' . `Lady' is
typically used to describe a woman who conforms to the model of
femininity current at the time - and hence, in feminist analysis,
is an honorific which disguises a lack of a real respect for
the woman underneath. Sometimes, too, `lady' carries definite
overtones of contempt, probably carried over from its
association with the idle rich. `Woman', on the other hand,
positively resonates with strength and warm feelings, and
sisterhood - even though it has a multitude of contemptuous uses
too, such as `get into the kitchen, woman!' or `I'll get my
woman to make you some dinner.' So using `lady' in a feminist
context means a deliberate irony is intended.
   The privileges of femininity include a high permissible
level of self-indulgence, in clothes, ornamentation, attention
to one's body, cooking and food; as well as permission - to
gossip, to care intensely about relationships, to be emotional,
frivolous at times; to leave hard decisions to other people; to
be evacuated first (with the children) from burning buildings
or hi-jacked planes; to leave sexual initiatives to the man; to
have an honourable excuse for failing to have a satisfying
career. 

