The liberation priests  

Nuns and priests defying the military in Manila this week have given new
impetus to the debate on liberation theology. It is a debate which has divided
the Catholic Church In Australia, and led to B. A. Santamaria's claim that
the Church has become a "major ally of the Left". Now, in the year of the
Pope's visit to Australia, conservative elements have called for a boycott
of Project Compassion, the annual Lenten appeal, because of its support
for left-wing causes. 

 DEBRA JOPSON reports  

WHEN YOU enter St Paul's, the Catholic bookshop in Sydney's Castlereagh
St, there is an equal number of bookshelves devoted to Jesus Christ and
Social Justice. There are tracts on Marx and the Bible.
  In Canberra, playwright Ron Evans is expanding his play already seen by
local theatre-goers, The Red Priest, with the help of the subject, Father
Brian Gore, the Columban missionary who now preaches nuclear disarmament
and redistribution of wealth as he travels Australia, having got out of
a Philippines jail.
  In once reliably conservative Adelaide, the church is setting up its own
social justice political wing with the approval of Archbishop Leonard Faulkner.
  In Melbourne, The Catholic Worker, once informally banned in the archdiocese
because of its liberal views, has been revived with a Eureka flag masthead
as an alternative to the more conservative Advocate.
  Sydney's Catholic Weekly has had a series of editorials which would make
an alternative liberal paper extraneous. Christa McAuliffe's death in the
space shuttle explosion, the Weekly says, should be seen with hope because
it delays Star Wars. The position of the latest Extraordinary Synod of Bishops
in Rome, which could be interpreted as condoning some aspects of "liberation
theology", is "a blow for those who believe in `Christ-capitalism'," it
opines.
  In the words of B. A. Santamaria, head of the National Civic Council,
writing in his News Weekly recently: "The Catholic Church in Australia,
of course, is not communist controlled. Such a statement would be a total
absurdity. But ... it has permitted itself to be transformed into a major
ally of the Left."
  Santamaria's theory is that left-leaning university-educated intellectuals
have taken over the social justice wing of the Catholic Church - of whose
thrust out of the sacristy and into politics he was one of the main architects.
They are now disseminating Marxist and quasi-Marxist views which are filtering
through the seminaries and schools.
  The closely-aligned right-wing Newman Graduates Association agrees and
has called for the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace (CCJP), the
church's politically involved social action wing, to be disbanded.
  Association president Patrick Newman called it a mouthpiece for "atheistic
communism"; his deputy, Father Terence Purcell, charged it with "choking
left-wing political views down people's necks."
  So far the deepest the attacks have bitten is that the Catholic Bishop
to the Armed Forces, Bishop Geoffrey Mayne, has resigned from his position
as one of the three bishops on the commission and plans to put to the Bishop's
Conference in May that its charter be changed.
  And those who have been ever vigilant of communist infiltration in the
Catholic Church have asked their fellow Catholics not to give to Project
Compassion, the annual Lenten appeal for money for the poor usually held
in every church up to Easter Saturday - this year from February 12 to March
29, because some of it goes to left-wing causes. Australian Catholic Relief
(ACR), which last year received about $2.4 million as administrator of Project
Compassion, will not know until money rolls in from all parishes at the
end of Lent how successful the boycott has been.
  Project Compassion and the CCJP still have the backing of the mainstream
of the church.
  Answering Santamaria's charges that Catholics were giving money thinking
it would go to the poor and hungry when in fact about a quarter of a million
dollars annually goes to the CCJP, the Catholic bishops put out a statement.
"We affirm the value of the development education programs financed through
Project Compassion and request Australian Catholics to continue their
wholehearted support for both the CCJP and Project Compassion," they said.
  Australian Catholic Relief itself has come under attack for sending funds
to Filipino grouups like Task Force Detainees, said to be an auxiliary of
the National Democratic Front (a communist organisation) and Australia-Asia
Worker Links, which was launched by communist unionist John Halfpenny.
  Father Boberg, parish priest of Berowra, NSW, has claimed ACR's development
programs in Kampuchea and Vietnam amount to "supporting comunism in South-East
Asia with Catholic money."
  And a writer in Quadrant, John Whitehall, has claimed that liberation
theology, that powerful brew born of Marxist study and Latin American
oppression, has seeped into Australia, leading to a "blind spot" to Marxist
tyranny. "The Philippines and Vietnam are good examples. The Philippines is 
being dissected under the glare of theologians' attention while Vietnam and 
all its persecution is being ignored," wrote Whitehall.
  He points to Father Brian Gore, the West Australian-born Columban missionary
jailed in the Philippines for allegedly murdering a Negros mayor until the
trumped-up charges were dropped, as the personification of the
Aussie-turned-revolutionary through liberation theology.
  Since he returned to Australia less than two years ago, Gore has been
travelling the country speaking against nuclear disarmament and for
redistribution of wealth, among other issues.
  He has talked at the same forums as radicals like the president of the
PLO-affiliated General Union of Palestinian Workers, Allam Tahboub.
                     
  The attacks on the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace, Australian
Catholic Relief and Gore appear to be part of a wider international battle
in a Church which likes to keep its skirmishes in-house, but has not been
able to contain them as the institution still reels from the fallout of
the overhaul it got at Vatican II 21 years ago.
  The Church's left and right wings are still arguing about how far Vatican
II's commitment to social reform can be taken.
  In Latin America, some took it as far as becoming "guerilla-priests" and
headed for the hills to fight with rebel forces. The more cerebral,
particularly Peruvian Gustavo Gutierrez, married Marx with the scriptures
to breed liberation theology and forge a "Church of the Poor".
  As American academic Penny Lernoux puts it in her book the Cry of the
People about the struggle for human rights there: "What the Latin American
theologians find particularly attractive in Marx is his suggestion of the
relationship between experience and theory - that if man has sufficient
understanding of his reality, he can improve that reality and himself and
that this new situation in turn influences, changes and educates him.
  "But an acceptance of Marx the sociologist need not imply support for
a Marxist ideology, much less communism, which the liberation theologians
reject as a political system incompatible with Christianity."
  With Catholic pragmatism, opposing factions hail statements from Rome
on the issues as backing their own positions and quote various Popes to
support their viewpoints.
  A much-quoted document by German Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger called
"Instruction on Certain Aspects of the Theology of Liberation" looks like
a poke in the eye for the Latin Americans and their followers.
  But the outcome of the recent Extraordinary Synod of Bishops in Rome was
seen as a win for the liberation theologians overall.
  Sydney's Catholic Weekly journalist Cliff Baxter said: "The Synod is a
great body blow to the right wing. Cardinal Ratzinger has been asked to
write a complementary work on liberation theology, pointing out its
advantages." Baxter claims it would be a mistake to see the likes of Father
Brian Gore as "the attractive aberrant". He places him firmly in the
mainstream. 
  
  GORE himself, who hardly fits the old image of the priest, swearing like
a trooper and happy to declare, "I'm not a Catholic, I'm a Christian,"
told this reporter, "Liberation theology is a result of groping with the
problem of poverty, but I hate being called a liberation theologian.
  "It's more getting your act together a bit better in the fight against
evil; which is the repression of people by social, political and economic
structures."
  How far liberation theology has affected the Church in Australia is difficult
to say.
  Head of Sydney University's School of Divinity, Dr Barbara Thiering, an
Anglican, says women in Australian churches have embraced it because it
tosses out the idea of God as a pervasive male figure.
  Uniting Church minister Dr Allan Loy, who teaches electives on liberation
theology at Sydney University, places it firmly in Latin America and says
Australians are trying to forge their own theology.
  Dr Rowan Ireland, an academic who speaks regularly at church gatherings
on Latin American Theology, told this reporter: "I find it difficult to
share the concern Mr Santamaria has, I still think basically most clergy
are terribly conservative.
  "There is a minority of aging parish priests who would read theology books
and that minority would know about the theology of liberation. One of the
reasons for the general conservatism of these male clergy is relative to
the population at large, they're aging. Some of the figures on that are
fairly hair-raising."
  What is more likely to shake the parish priests into looking for new roles
is the drop in church attendances, said Ireland, a senior lecturer in sociology
at La Trobe University.
  "Thinking of the role of the Church and the priest is forced on them every
day. That is much more of an impulse toward getting to know other theologies
than being undermined by the universities."
  Father Bruce Duncan, of the missionary order, the Redemptorists, which
is active in Latin America and the Philippines, said: "The main thing is
it has permeated all of theology, giving it a flavour and a new range. The
concern for social justice, peace and development have gone beyond what
you would call liberation theologies."
  Duncan points to the Catholic Church's backing of the fight for a just
wage as an example of its historical concerns for social justice in Australia.
  "The reason it seems so new is that the split in the Labor Party, in Catholic
Action and between the Sydney and Melbourne churches made it too hot a
potato to handle and so for 20 years, the debate flagged."
  He believes the Catholic Church's apparent paralysis in Nazi Germany is
still affecting a lot of its members "knowing it is not enough to be opposed
to dictatorships; the Church must go up-front in opposition."
  A lot of Australian Catholics still have a "cold war mentality" but Marxist
thinking has had a big effect, even in the Vatican.
  "Pope John Paul II brought a strong Marxist influence into his writings
because he came out of a situation where he was constantly debating with
Marxism," said Duncan.
  Politically, the church has an international perspective because, "It
realises in many countries, it is the only major institutional actor which
can speak out against oppression. Sometimes there is either a revolutionary
option or a complete cave-in to a dictatorial regime."
                      
  In Brazil seven years ago, I was shocked to walk into a Catholic church
in the northern coastal city of Recife to find an economic pie chalked
on a blackboard showing how the concentration of money in the hands of the
rich had doomed the rest to poverty.
  It was a slice of political education in a church which in other parts
of South America, had seemed only to offer nauseating displays of
jewel-encrusted Marys amid dire poverty.
  In Pinochet's Chile, a spokeswoman for the Vicariate of Solidarity, in
a small office alongside Santiago Cathedral (for safety purposes), brought
out the list of desparecidos, or "disappeared ones", and talked of how the
"basic Christian communities" set up on the land "conscientised" the people
in ways of overcoming social injustice.
  She also had a clipping of a pro-Government newspaper with a photo of
a telephone line outside the Vicariate captioned "Direct Link to Moscow".
  In Australia, which Duncan describes as "the most secular country in the
world", the Church is not such a mighty political force and is anyway seen
as conservative, producing mainly right-wing Labor politicians in the past.

