<subsample>
	<id> G73b </id>
	


	<source> Good Weekend - June 1986 </source>
	


	<h> I'd talk to you if I weren't feeling dormey </h>
	


	<bl> By Robert Haupt </bl>
	

HAVE you ever sat down to think? Don't evade the point by saying that you
can think perfectly well  standing up - you know what I mean. I'm talking
about breaking off from what you're doing, making some space in your day
and actually THINKING. I'll bet you haven't done it since you were a child.
  As we know, most good thoughts arise unbidden and hardly anything worthwhile
comes to mind when we want something to come to mind. In exactly the same
way as we best see something faint (Halley's Comet, say) by not looking
directly at it, so the thinking part of our brain tends to work better when
we're not conscious of thinking: not so much lateral as peripheral thinking.
  So much of the national thinking is done under the shower that I wonder
whether we mightn't be better at solving this country's problems if we returned
to the - longer, more thought-provoking - bath. 
  Personally, I'm a walking thinker: cogitation on the hoof, so to speak.
As I was thinking my way along a desolate footpath in the rain the other
day, wondering at how many shades of grey there are, my mind was run over
by a train of thought coming the other way: how few colours there are! 
  Add them up for yourself: blue, red and yellow, that's three; with black
and white, five. Don't you think that's a bit meagre?
  Don't we deserve more? Oh, I know you can mix them together and get shades
of fawn, chartreuse and aquamarine, not to mention puce. But imagine the
range, the sheer scope and variety of colours we would have if we had a
decent number of basic colours, 12, or 30, or a round 100.
  Imagine what a flag competition we'd be having then! None of this
green-and-gold and red-white-and-blue. There would be entries in unimaginable
hues, each more extravagantly gorgeous than the last.
  Advertising would have more to work with. No more the boring round from
red to blue, to green and white and back to red again, with the occasional
detour to black.
  Our cigarette boxes and soap-powder packets would put the rainbow to shame.
  Oh, the rainbow. With 10 times as many bands, it would fill the sky, bringing
wonder and amazement to the millions of people all over the world who are
too poor to have colour brought to them by television.
  Other fruits of nature would be given astonishing allure - none of them
more so than fruit itself. I can't tell you what exactly you'd find on our
greengrocer's shelves but you can bet that it wouldn't be green. 
  In fact, I can't tell you anything about these extra colours I have in
mind, for the simple reason that the words don't exist with which to describe
them. 
  We only know what green means once we've seen a cucumber, or a Melbourne
tram.
  Indeed, I don't know how I can be sure that what I think of as green isn't
what you think of as another colour entirely, crimson, perhaps, or an
outrageous shade of peach. 
  You and I agree that Melbourne trams are green (not the orange ones, silly!)
only by agreement that the colour which trams are is green. Get inside my
eyes and have a look and you might be absolutely startled. 
  I can think of names - blange, for instance, for a colour that leaves
you feeling warm and treacly (as, after listening to Kamahl sing); streer
for something cold, yet velvety. But the names don't really help. Notice
how I've described the indescribable by talking, not colour, but emotion,
temperature and texture.
  Colours loosely suggest such things.
  So if we had some new colours what kinds of associations might they have?
Banality is pretty well catered for already, what with fawn and beige and
various unalluring shades of green.
  But what about pomposity?
  If we had a new colour, one that was rich and not particularly pleasant
- something like a new purple - is it too much to hope that it might become
associated with all things overblown and self-important?
  And that people might be purged of that affliction merely by the display
of the colour?
  Our emotions might become better known to us if there were more colours
to identify them with.
  Take the feeling of temporary impatience with another person, the wish
not to be with them at this moment.
  If there were a colour to express such a feeling that was neither the
blue of despair nor the brown of distraction, much disappointment might
be avoided: &quot;I'd like to, normally,&quot; we would say, &quot;it's just that I'm feeling
dormey.&quot;
  Perhaps I'm over-optimistic. Science, isn't likely to come up with new
colours for this world - it seems to be a problem as much with the receiver
as with the transmission, the eye being as unable to switch on to a new
colour band as my television set is to pick up SBS.
  And if any new colours were to be captured miraculously from a far galaxy,
no doubt they would be pressed into use decorating disposable-nappy ads
long before they could be attached to something as pure as an emotion.
  So there they are, some stray thoughts picked up from a rainy day.


</subsample>
