<subsample>
	<id> G74b </id>
	


	<source> The Bulletin - September 30, 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Kakadu compromise has no future </h>
	


	<bl> By John Stackhouse </bl>
	

KAKADU National Park may warm the inner glow of conservation and earn us
points in arenas such as UNESCO. But economically it has Australia by the
throat.
  The Hawke government compromise last week that blocked development in
two-thirds of the park (compounding the Fraser government's shilly-shallying
before it) means that because of lost export income the Australian dollar
is cheaper internationally than it could have been and interest rates,
correspondingly, are a few points higher. These fundamentals also have a
carry-through effect on the economy, far beyond the ideologies that have
driven Kakadu thinking so far.
  Economically, the decision rules off a medium-term fix to our foreign
exchange problems. The Northern Territory Department of Minerals and Energy
last week put a value of $5 billion on the exports Australia has forgone
in the last decade by not developing known resources in Kakadu. Taken to
a monthly rate of about $40 million, this would have helped to knock our
trade deficit figure below the dollar-hurting level of $1 billion monthly.
  However, according to the Northern Territory Chamber of Mines, had normal
development taken place, instead of being shelved, this figure might have
doubled. Consequently the whole panoply of the Hawke-Keating defence of
the dollar might have been less daunting to the average Australian's home
mortgage. In a little-reported estimate, the chamber put the figure on
known value of minerals locked in by the government's decision not to allow
further development in Kakadu's stages one and two at between $70 and $100
billion. This is roughly equivalent to our international debt.
  The figure, however, is essentially speculative because, since Aboriginal
land rights legislation and the foundation of the national park, the work
necessary to prove the existence of the ores on which it is based has not
been allowed.
  But the knowledge of the basic geology and hence the mineralisation exists.
The theoretical work shows that the deposits which established Kakadu as
the world's most important uranium province were discovered because they
broke the surface. To the west of the proved deposits, on the flood plain
which has been established only about 1500 years, the sand and the mud
and the buffalo wallows have dusted over what otherwise would have been
a surface-cropping mineralisation that is a mirror of the ones already
discovered. Had exploration and development gone ahead, the mines now in
operation and selling at world market prices of the time would probably
have earned double, or about $1 billion a year over the past decade - say
about $80 million a month. This would cover a remarkable hole in our trade
deficit.
  But Kakadu is not only a theoretical negative in the big scene of Australian
economics. It is a hole in the ground as far as day-to-day government
expenditures and revenues are concerned.
  Given the 19,000 square kilometres size of Kakadu when stage three is
added, sheer maintenance of the park involves a major drain on government
finances - about $7 million a year. The Australian National Parks and Wildlife
Service which literally owns Kakadu has operated in the past as though the
taxpayers' purse is bottomless. But this sort of area costs a fortune
merely to maintain. Conservationists complain that the money the commonwealth
is spending is inadequate for major works, such as controlling erosion,
buffalo and pigs, and noxious weeds.
  But under the new commonwealth regime, the user pays and projects such
as Kakadu will have to cover their costs. The revenue-earning alternatives
are tourism (which the service has been embracing recently) or royalties
from mining. Mining has got to be the way to go. The potentials of Kakadu's
minerals are so great that the mining companies have been remarkably patient.
  The sell-out of the miners began in the early days of the Whitlam
government. In late 1973, the then Northern Territory Minister, Rex Patterson,
tried to set up a deal with Northern Territory mining applicants. 
  Patterson said Canberra proposed (in February 1974) to introduce in the
Northern Territory assembly legislation providing for national parks and
for the issue of new rights allowing for prospecting in those areas. This
was Patterson's specific promise: &quot;I am authorised by the government to
assure you that if you applications for renewal of licences are approved
only in respect of areas outside the boundaries of the proposed park you
will, upon commencement of the new legislation, be issued with fresh licences
... (for) the areas within the park boundary to which your current renewal
applications relate.&quot;
  Two things then happened. The miners accepted the government's word as
being not only that of Patterson but also his successors (which was a
disastrous mistake). They also learned never to trust the government's word
again. Along the way, the situation became complicated even more by the
Aboriginal land rights issue.
  Companies like BHP and Geopeko (the exploration arm of Peko Wallsend)
started to work their way through the maze and succeeded. BHP as the operator
for the gold prospect of Coronation Hill (which is at the southern end
of what is to be Stage three of Kakadu) went to the Aboriginal custodians
rather than through official channels and scored a notable victory. In the
Coronation Hill case, the Northern Territory Sacred Sites Authority ruled
against development. The custodians, taking outside advice, withdrew their
original endorsement of the hill as a sacred site on clear (and necessarily
secret) evidence that the site they identified with was 50 kilometres
distant.
  In the Peko case, the company negotiated over a period with custodians
of areas it was interested in and got an agreement inviting them into what,
for a long time, has been part of the first stage of Kakadu.


</subsample>
