<sample>
	<id> G75 </id>
	


	<source> The Bulletin - July 22, 1986 </source>
	


	<note> 2017 words </note>
	


	<h> Change strikes the manors of the Western District </h>
	

The grim realities of modern agriculture are having their impact on Victoria's
upper crust Western District - Australia's richest farming region. NIGEL
AUSTIN explains how a region that rode tall on the merino's back is coping
with drastic changes.

THE CHILL winds of Victoria's Western District winter blow an instant message
to the mind on leaving the stately Woolongoon homestead; the nearby lakes
and low lying, flood prone land are a further reminder of the area's generous
climate.
  The Weatherly family's Woolongoon property lies in the middle of the
most fertile, broad expanse of farming land in Australia, yet land prices,
based on its productive potential, are cheaper than anywhere else. In recent
decades the region has failed to make the large productivity gains achieved
in newer farming areas. When modern technology enabled the plough to push
further north and west into those regions, arid land prices escalated.
Unfortunately, in the Western District water-logging remains a serious
impediment to greater profitability. Now, however, industry leaders believe
Australia's most renowned agricultural region is on the verge of a
breakthrough that will see an explosion in cropping.
  James Weatherly, 44, owner of Woolongoon, believes it is unfortunate that
the Western District has become a victim of its own image - it has held
the region back. Some people living there and others in urban areas have
mistakenly regarded it as the last bastion of the squattocracy era. The
two storey Woolongoon homestead is part of the false image. It was built
for past generations and represents a huge maintenance burden. &quot;You don't
realise the hard work involved in its upkeep,&quot; Weatherly says. Like the
homestead, the neat bluestone entrance and narrow bitumen road leading to
the former are a legacy of bygone days. 
  The post-war years have seen a rapid erosion of the district's wealth.
Numerous small towns like Caramut, Penshurst, Hexham and Coleraine are
dying. The number of farmers is falling rapidly, the workforce is shrinking;
only the size of farms is increasing.
  Since its settlement 150 years ago the Western District has invariably
reflected the health of Australian agriculture, shared its secrets, nursed
it through bad times and occasionally held the nation's power in its cradle.
The flat, windswept plains were in turn the starting point for much of
Australia's rural settlement, the stud stock farm for the nation and the
financial strengths behind many early developments. Until recent years
the Western District was the richest farming region in Australia, its large
sheep and cattle populations enjoying a climate that rarely failed to provide
an abundance of feed.
  The high cost nature of agriculture has held the district back. The Victorian
Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs says it is producing far below
its capability. Yet in the years ahead it will have the ability to recapture
some of its past prosperity. The department believes cropping holds the
potential to reshape the pattern of agriculture in the region. Rapid advances
in technology and new crop varieties are the main factors behind this promised
escalation.
  The new technology is expected to increase wheat yields from an average
of 1.8t a hectare to 7t a hectare. It is typical of productivity increases
which have carried Australian agriculture from generation to generation,
through gloom and boom to its position as the most efficient, unsubsidised
producer in the world.
  The Weatherly family is typical of the Western District landowners whose
families have held land for several generations. Grandfather William bought
the land back in 1893 in the aftermath of the great bank crash after selling
a parcel of BHP shares. The family prospered. James' father, William, assumed
control and in the years immediately after World War II the Weatherlys,
like most in agriculture, enjoyed a golden era.
  &quot;The wool boom came in the early 1950's, farming was a way of life and
people made a lot of money,&quot; Weatherly says. &quot;My contemporaries went to
public schools and then after school a lot went to universities in England
or New Zealand for further education. We had 16 on the staff in the mid-1960s
and that was after the real wool boom.
  &quot;I remember the general feeling when I left school that if someone wasn't
too bright, then stick them on the land and they would make plenty of money.
But the old way of life has gone and people who tried to maintain it have
left the area. We're probably still fortunate in the standards we enjoy
and the homesteads we live in compared to other parts of Australia. But
you can be deceived by appearances, a lot of people appear traditional and
conservative, but few don't have a modern approach to running their
properties.&quot;
  Weatherly can remember his childhood when Woolongoon ran just under one
sheep to the acre (0.4ha). It is now nearly 4 sheep to the acre. Woolongoon
has dramatically lifted its productivity in the past 10 years. Shearing 26,000
sheep it cut 760 bales of wool this year compared to just 480 bales from
24,000 sheep in 1976.
  &quot;If we were achieving the same production as 10 years ago we would be
finished,&quot; Weatherly says. &quot;But we're starting to push production gains
pretty hard now. Sheep are still the mainstay. Like my parents say, sheep
will always make you a quid, cattle sometimes and horses never. For all
that it's very kind country, there are few droughts and it will carry a
family for generations. You don't make big forturnes, but it's pretty hard
to go broke.&quot;
  Woolongoon has slashed its staff in the past 20 years. Weatherly runs
the property with only five full-time men. Jobs such as shearing, mulesing
and fencing are now performed by contractors - a more productive way of
employing people because of the large additional costs involved in a
permanent work force, he says. He thinks the cost-price squeeze has probably
hurt farmers in the Western District more than in other areas. &quot;And every
time they put a new tax on it's the smaller blokes trying to make a go of
it who get hurt.&quot;
  Weatherly says in future farmers are just going to have to be more
productive with what they are presently running. Wool has a big advantage
in not having to compete with overseas subsidised products as most other
rural commodities must. He can't see deer or goats taking over in the Western
District.
  However, Weatherly believes cropping, especially oilseeds, leasing of
land and contract machinery ownership will become more important.
  Robin Ritchie, owner of the nearby Blackwood property at Penshurst, is
one of the few descendants of a pioneering family of the region to still
own the land taken up by his forebears. James Ritchie started Blackwood
in 1841, only seven years after the Henty family became the first farmers
in the Western District at Portland. &quot;My descendants came to Australia
to better themselves from Scotland, where they had been tenant farmers.
They were successful and to some extent I consider myself a trustee of
the land from one generation to the next. I didn't buy it, I didn't earn
it, I inherited it - if you like, I chose my parents well.
  &quot;We're making about 5 percent return to capital from sheep, which isn't
good enough. But if all you were in farming for was the return on capital,
then you mightn't be in farming. Another reason I continue is because it
is the industry I know. Yet I think if I hadn't been born at Blackwood I
wouldn't have gone farming.&quot;
  Ritchie says a possible reason his family has survived while many others
haven't is that there have been only four generations compared to six for
many other families. But Blackwood is a great deal smaller than it was and
keeps getting smaller. Ritchie believes that without primogeniture there
just isn't going to be a continuation of families in agriculture.
  &quot;I think it is astounding that hardly any of the original families are
left. One of the reasons is a number of people going on to the land are
not being educated well enough. Too few people are looking at agriculture
commercially. They are looking at it still as a way of life and farming
land in Australia is not performing because of that. In the longer term
farming will go on attracting people who like the life or who just drifted
on to the land after school without making a specific career decision.
  &quot;Another reason is the after tax climate is not adequate to encourage
people to invest in a particular project and make it perform. In a recent
list of Australia's wealthiest 250 people, only 5 percent were exporters
- 20 percent were import competing and 75 percent trade protected. Not until
after tax profits are arranged so they encourage export industries will
the `bright boys' go exporting.&quot;
  Ritchie says he could increase production at Blackwood by 15 percent
or more, but if he did he would only be rewarded with increased taxes.
Ritchie says part of the problem is the mentality that believes success
means maintaining one's financial position, while the metropolitan view
is that success means growth.
  More merino sheep, less crossbred sheep, less beef and dairy cattle and
less hay making are part of the Western District's future, Ritchie says.
&quot;But there is no guiding star up there telling us what to do. Wool is the
only thing we can see.
  &quot;There is one resource in south-western Victoria near Portland, Port Fairy
and Peterborough about which no one is doing anything. It is hot artesian
water coming to the surface from more than 1000m below the surface. There
is an opportunity to find a product - like flowers, orchids or seedlings
- that is dependent on warmth. I don't think it will be one of the older
Western District families who will use it. Maybe it will, but it's more
likely to be somebody with entrepreneurial skills.&quot;
  Ritchie also believes the Western District is going to learn a lot more
about cropping, especially in well-drained areas, because of its ability
to grow higher yielding crops and closeness to ports.
  Bill Gardner is leading the technology battle to introduce cropping from
the Crops Research Institute in Horsham. He says higher rainfall zones
like the Western District have considerably more scope to improve cropping
yields than arid areas. The Mallee has reached 75 percent of its potential,
while the Western District has achieved only 20 to 30 percent of its potential.
  The present Western District wheat yield is 1.8t a hectare, while better
farmers average 2.2 to 2.5t. Gardner says there is no reasons why wheat
yields can't be lifted to 7t a hectare. &quot;About one million hectares could
be cropped to wheat in the Western District if we can develop the drainage
technology and develop the correct management procedures,&quot; Gardner says.
&quot;I would expect the wheat belt to contract to the higher rainfall areas
in the next 20 to 40 years because that is where the productivity gains
will be achieved.&quot;
  Gardner says the aim is to achieve a yield increase of 2t a hectare which
would be more than adequate to repay an investment of $1000 a hectare for
subsurface drainage. It would also be tax deductible and with that sort
of increase would be well and truly justified. Rape seed would be an even
more profitable crop to grow, he says. Drainage would be achieved by
underground plastic pipes, mole drains and even raising the soil into beds.
Higher yielding varieties of wheat from overseas are being trialled with
considerable promise. The use of nitrogen, lime and crop rotations would
be an integral part of the new cropping system, according to Gardner.
  &quot;Once we drain the soil there is really no limit to what can be grown,&quot;
Gardner says. &quot;One farmer has already installed subsurface drainage. When
the system is proved I would expect it to snowball.&quot;
  He adds: &quot;As the cost of producing wheat increases, and it has always
increased faster than prices have risen, you must lift productivity to
survive.


</sample>
