Photography - a stormy tale of two cities with different views   

The art of photography in Australia is suffering because of rifts between
its leading exponents in Melbourne and Sydney. Some people, reports JOHN
BAXTER, can't even agree on what the word "photograph" means.

IF A SINGLE event encapsulated the divisions in Australian photography,
it was a lecture given recently at Sydney's Australian Centre for Photography,
when Oxford's Michael Weaver, one of the busiest international experts,
spoke on New Yorker Robert Mapplethorpe, a show of whose work curated by
John Buckley was shortly to reach the centre.
  Weaver detailed Mapplethorpe's preoccupations: New York's homosexual
underworld; blacks, bikers and bi-sexuals and the androgynous charms of
muscle-pumper and performance artist Lisa Lyon. Two other recent interests
of Mapplethorpe's, portraits of New York celebrities and some unaccountable
images of flowers, Weaver dismissed as passing phases, of little interest.
Those in his audience who had already seen the show exchanged amused glances.
Buckley's choice was very thin indeed on gay erotica, heavy on portraits
and flowers. But then, it had been curated in Melbourne, and that - to
the Sydney audience - said a great deal.
  Rifts between New South Wales and Victoria, between individuals, factions
and galleries, between rival schools of curating and scholarship, even
between definitions of the word "photography" characterise the Australian
photographic establishment. "Australian photography grew through a
proliferation of factions," one Sydney curator told me. "Rather than reading
and looking at other people's work and developing as artists, new
photographers budded. There are some people who haven't changed their ideas
about photography in 15 years."
  For almost that long, the Australian Centre for Photography has been
in the centre of the battle, sometimes part of the debate, sometimes the
cause of it. Favoritism, incompetence and confusion are just some of the
charges levelled both from outside the organisation and within its own
ranks.
  The Australian Institute for Photography, as it was then called, accepted
an extensive brief when it was founded in 1974. It promised not only an
exhibition space and an archive of distinguished local artists, but also
- in a nod to then fashionable conceptions of access - classes for a public
which the new accessibility of cameras had turned on to photography.
  Hopes that the centre would flourish when it moved in 1981 to a building
in Sydney's Oxford Street suavely refurbished by Don Gazzard (whose offices
discreetly occupy a space behind it) weren't realised. Dobell House was
neither large enough to fulfil the centre's grandiose aims nor small enough
to escape notice and criticism.
  The photographic classes paid their way but from the start centre exhibition
policy was erratic, salaries low and division within the ruling executive
bitter. New director Christine Godden was less than popular, and after her
stormy ousting in 1982, subsequent weak administrations culminating in
a directorless 10 months did nothing to revive confidence on the part of
the staff, the public or the office of the Minister for the Arts and the
Visual Arts Board whose contributions keep the centre afloat.
  Nor were Sydneysiders happy to hear news of a second Australian Centre
for Photography being planned in Melbourne. Decades of bitter interstate
rivalvy bubbled to a boil.
  There was plenty to be bitter about. Sydney had been the national capital
of photography until the war. In the 60s, as photography first burgeoned
as an art and trendies took down the Drysdale prints to replace them with
images by Max Dupain and David Moore, it was still Sydney that made the
running. When the Bilsons hung Grant Mudford architectural prints on the
walls of Berowra Waters Inn, photography's star was seen as patently in
the ascendant.
  But if Sydney had the tradition of photography, Melbourne had the movers
and shakers. Victoria's National Gallery set up our first major photographic
collection in 1968. It has flourished under curator Jennie Boddington. Some
criticise her perchant for collecting photo-journalism and quantities of
re-printed images, useful as educational reference but anathema to those
who prefer to see photography as one of the "fine" arts. But Boddington
is unrepentant, popular - and influential.
  Melbourne also nurtured the major photographers of the 70s, including
Bill Henson, whose austere nudes and shadowed interiors have made him, with
expatriate Mudford, our most famous photo artist abroad. It also produced
Paul Cox, later to switch to film-making, and Warren Breninger, whose
portraits, "manipulated" with colored ink, crayon and pencil, presaged
the style that would smuggle photography into the fine art galleries.
  Melbourne could also boast the greatest of the radicals, Carol Jerrems,
whose outrageous reportage of sexual liberation from the inside set her
stamp on the 70s. Even before her death at 31 in 1981, images like the 1972
Vale Street, with its bare-breasted girl flanked by two truculent male
companions after what was presumably a night of sexual excess, had become,
as an Australian National Gallery catalogue acknowledged recently, "an
icon".
  But Jerrems' liberalism died with her. Breninger and Henson dominated
the end of the decade, along with fellow manipulators like Micky Allen.
With them at the helm, photography sailed into a twilight zone where images
mated with art and propaganda. Photographs were collaged, or accompanied
by hectoring texts taking up more space than the pictures. Feminist
rhetoriticians like Helen Grace found photography a useful pulpit for their
ideas. An image by Christine Godden, in a 1982 Lady Fairfax show at the
NSW Art Gallery combined stills and Godden's naked and bruised torso with
a shakily handwritten text detailing the assault in which she sustained
the injuries. It was the dernier cri of the style which has since languished
in favor of a new interest in figurative work and landscape.
  Sydney today lags behind both Victoria and Canberra. The Australian National
Gallery has the most space and money for photography, ranking sixth among
the world's galleries in its purchasing budget. An annual $250,000 is earmarked
for overseas work while local images are acquired, mainly under grants,
of around $12,000 from Kodak and Philip Morris. Major shows are not relegated
to some ghetto in a garret, but hung on the ground floor adjacent to the
Pollocks and Rothkos.
  By contrast the Art Gallery of NSW has only $24,000 a year for local and
foreign acquisitions. Photography occupies a basement between ethnography
and education. Rebuilding will shortly re-site the gallery in a larger corner
of the lower ground floor but any improvement in photography's marginal
status seems unlikely.
  The gallery has yet to recover the credibility lost in a 1983 scandal
when respected local photographer Max Pam offered to sell a collection of
images of Asia. The price was a philanthropic $700, about $36 a print, but
though director Edmund Capon endorsed the purchase, the governing body
vetoed it on doctrinal grounds. Why, they queried, when a painter was
represented by only two or three pictures, should a photographer have hundreds?
Curator Gael Newton was forced to decline Pam's offer. "I could never look
him in the face again," Newton says. "No other collection was ever offered
to the gallery after that."
  The Pam pictures went to a delighted Art Gallery of South Australia and
following further debacles, Newton departed for Canberra to curate the
ANG's mammoth Bicentennial survey of Australian photography.
  In Sydney today, exhibition of photography outside the Art Gallery of
NSW is patchy and occasional. Since the collapse of Sydney's Images Gallery
only a few fine art dealers handle photographic work. Curatorship in such
shows is erratic, where it exists at all. The Print Room did Robert McGarlane
proud in a 1985 retrospective with a celebrity-studded launch and glossy
brochure. But a recent show of period glamor portraits by William Buckle
at Josef Lebovic offered the dismal sight of a wall of prints hung
edge-to-edge under the catchpenny title Buckle's Beauties. In the same week
an important group of historical photographs was hung in the lobby of a
Sydney hotel, while some murky snapshots taken by the touring Footsbarn
Theatre Company sullied the lobby of the Sydney Theatre Company's Wharf
Theatre. All were announced in the press and reviewed as "exhibitions".
  Though organisations like the Mitchell Library have huge uncatalogued
collections of photographs, there are neither the funds nor the expertise
to assess them.
  The appointment of ex-Australian National Gallery curator Martyn Jolly
to the Australian Centre of Photography is a hopeful sign of a new deal
for Sydney photography. The other is the controversial choice of Denise
Robinson, late of Melbourne University Union's George Paton Gallery, as
director. Robinson acknowledges that her background is not in photography
but in fine arts. And being from Melbourne is, she agrees, no help in this
chauvinistic field. She is diplomatic about NSW arts funding practices,
but what she has to say about Victoria offers a clue.
  "The Victorian Ministry for the Arts has a lot to answer for," she charges,
"in terms of the way it has centralised cultural production in Melbourne.
It instigates projects: it doesn't look for them to come from outside.
There's not enough debate within it: there's not enough input from the
community and interested groups."
  Beyond the problems of winning government support for the embattled centre,
Robinson hopes for sponsorship, a dialogue with other visual arts, even
an assault on foreign audiences - though most still tend, she finds, to
view Australia either as an exotic Nirvana or a primitive outpost of Empire.
The French are preoccupied with a romantic view of Aboriginal life, while
audiences at a forum on an Australian show she curated at the 1984 Edinburgh
festival quizzed the artists seriously on whether they had studios. Before
Australian photography is accepted overseas, she suggests, local artists
will need a strategy to bypass such intellectual tank traps.
  With this problem added to those of a duplication of resources, a want
of central planning and a bewildering lack of standards, it's no wonder
many of our photographers view the future as through a glass, darkly.

