<sample>
	<id> H01 </id>
	


	<note> 2001 words </note>
	


	<source> Kakadu: A World Heritage of Unsurpassed Beauty </source>
	


	<bl> By Derrick Ovington </bl>
	


	<h> A HERITAGE OF AUSTRALIAN ANIMALS AND PLANTS </h>
	

Conservation status    Australia is an island continent and as a consequence,
except for migratory species, Australian animals and plants have evolved
in isolation and many are specific to the continent. However, numerous Kakadu
species have retained affinities with those of South-East Asia, the nearest
land mass, apparently reflecting their shared common ancestry when Australia
and Asia were joined together.
  Kakadu is the home of a rich heritage of native animals and plants; many
are both attractive and of scientific interest. Because of the value of
native animals and plants to Aborigines, it is not surprising that they
feature in Aboriginal mythology and rock art. The rock paintings, particularly
of animals, provide evidence both of long-term changes in the species present
and of the continued presence in the area of other species for thousands
of years.
  Each of the numerous Park habitats has its own characteristic community
of living things interacting in innumerable ways with one another and with
their environments. Knowledge of these functional relationships is critical
for management of the Park. Detailed research is providing vital information
to enable the implementation of effective management practices to safeguard
this remarkable range of species and habitats. Both are irreplaceable, having
resulted from over 20 million years of evolution.
  The species present at Kakadu differ greatly in distribution and conservation
status. Some are common in Australia or across tropical northern Australia
and are not under threat. Other species though widespread in northern Australia
are rare and their survival may depend in large measure on the protection
afforded by the National Park. A few species have a very restricted
distribution, being found only at Kakadu and sometimes only in certain
localities because of their very precise environmental requirements. Knowledge
of the abundance and distribution of species in the Park helps to ensure
the protection of rare and endangered species and improves the likelihood
of people seeing plants and animals of special interest to them.
  All the different kinds of native living things present have a role to
play in maintaining the delicate harmony of Kakadu with its self-regulating
and continuing sequence of reproduction, life, death and decay. Of all tropical
wilderness areas in the southern hemisphere Kakadu National Park is the
most outstanding sanctuary, providing a haven where a wide variety of animals
and plants, including some rare or endangered species, can survive in natural
surroundings. Let us keep it that way.


	<h> Animals </h>
	
Whilst Kakadu is renowned for its variety of wild animals,
undoubtedly the species tally is incomplete. Already scientists have recorded
about 50 mammal, 275 bird, 75 reptile, 25 frog and 55 fish species. There
is a great diversity of insects; about 4500 species have been recognised.
As systematic faunal surveys of different habitats are completed, new species
for the Park, and some new to science, are being discovered and species
not seen for many years are being rediscovered.
  Most native animals at Kakadu are harmless to people but some can be plain
annoying, especially insects which buzz around, bite or suck blood from
people. Mosquitoes thrive in the Kakadu environment and can be particularly
troublesome to campers. Other creatures such as venomous snakes and large
crocodiles are dangerous if provoked. Animals protected in national parks
tend to have little fear of people and, with some justificaiton, may regard
people as food or as intruders to their territories, posing a challenging
threat to themselves or their offspring. Naturally, in these circumstances
some wild animals may react aggressively to humans. Consequently it is
advisable not to act foolishly by taking risks. Watching wild animals at
Kakadu can be a pleasant experience but sensible people keep a safe distance
from wild animals and use telephoto lenses to take close-up photographs.
Most native animals are nocturnal and the best time to see some species
is dusk or shortly after dawn.


	<h> Mammals </h>
	
The native mammals are generally shy and avoid people by hiding
or running away. Dingoes or wild dogs Canis familiaris dingo range widely
in the Park, feeding mainly on other mammals, birds and reptiles. Most often
they are encountered as single animals or as a pair but sometimes family
packs of up to five are seen. Virtually all dingoes at Kakadu are pure bred
for there has been little interbreeding with domestic dogs.
  Macropods are common in some habitats. The gregarious agile wallabies
Macropus agilis often move in groups through the open woodland whilst wallaroos
or euros M. robustus are usually seen as solitary animals in upland wooded
areas. Mobs of antilopine kangaroos M. antilopinus are occasionally seen
on stony ridges or in open woodland, particularly where plants are regenerating
after fire. Spectacled hare wallabies Lagorchestes conspicillatus and northern
nailtail wallabies Onychogalea unguifera are present in small numbers in
grassland and open woodland areas. The very shy black wallaroos Macropus
bernardus are largely confined to the Park. The relatively small nabarleks
Peradorcas concinna and short eared rock wallabies Petrogale brachyotis
inhabit the rocky formations of the escarpment and outliers.
  The smaller mammals tend to be inconspicuous and only seen briefly. The
arboreal sugar gliders Petaurus breviceps and northern brushtail possums
Trichosurus arnhemensis as well as northern brown bandicoots Isoodon macrourus
are sometimes observed during the day in wooded areas. Several kinds of
water rats and other small rodents live in freshwater lagoon and floodplain
habitats but are rarely encountered. Echidnas Tachyglossus aculeatus, sometimes
called spiny anteaters, are to be found on the escarpment. Some small mammals
are largely confined to rocky areas; typical of these are rock possums
Pseudocheirus dahli, Woodward's thick tailed rats Zyzomys woodwardi and
Harney's marsupial mice Parantechinus bilarni, only known since 1948. Many
species of small mammals are essentailly nocturnal and are aggressive, fierce
carnivores, for instance northern native cats or northern quolls Dasyurus
hallucatus and arboreal phascogales Phascogale tapoatafa.
  Within the Park there is a remarkable variety of flying mammals, twenty-six
of the sixty-five species of Australian bats being present. The bats of
Kakadu range in size from large, fruit-eating flying foxes, weighing at
maturity over half a kilogram, to small, mouse-sized animals. Whilst some
people are apprehensive of bats, the ill repute of bats is undeserved. These
remarkable animals are highly adapted to enable them to fly and navigate
at night. Bats spend the days roosting in groves of trees, caves, rock
overhangs, tree hollows and under bark. They are often seen flying at dusk
when they leave their roosts to forage.
  The two species of flying foxes present at Kakadu, black flying foxes
Pteropus alecto and little red flying foxes P. scapulatus, are the most
conspicuous of the bats. Roosting by day in large, and somewhat smelly,
camps in mangroves, paperbark swamps and monsoon forests, they emerge in
droves to feed at night on the fruits, flowers and leaves of trees,
particularly of Ficus, Eucalyptus and Melaleuca species. Often they are
seen, or heard, squabbling amongst themselves whilst feeding at Nourlangie
Camp and Park Headquarters. Since flying foxes are important pollinators
of plants and disperse viable seed through their excrement, they are important
for the perpetuation of some plant species.
  Kakadu is a key refuge for at least four species of endangered bats: ghost
bats Macroderma gigas, orange horseshoe bats Rhinonicteris aurantius, lesser
wart nosed horseshoe bats Hipposideros stenotis and white striped sheathtail
bats Taphozous kapalgensis.
  Ghost bats are carnivorous, feeding on insects, mammals, small birds,
and even other bats on occasion. They roost in caves and overhangs with
stable temperature and humidity regimes. Orange horseshoe bats are very
rare, with possibly fewer than 2000 living in Australia. Although individuals
have been seen at Kakadu, no roosting sites have been discovered. Bats of
this species are known to roost in very hot, humid caves and being very
sensitive to human interference may abandon caves if disturbed. They feed
on moths, beetles, wasps and ants caught while flying low over the ground
Little is known of the biology of lesser wart nosed horseshoe bats. They
have two warty protuberances on the nose which may aid echo location of
objects when flying at night. White striped sheathtail bats, only discovered
in 1979, are apparently endemic to Kakadu National Park. Found in open eucalypt
and pandanus woodland, they fly high and fast in pursuit of insects and
are believed to roost in the hollows of trees or under exfoliating bark.


	<h> Birds </h>
	
Kakadu National Park has a remarkable combination of bird species;
about a third of all Australian species has been recorded there. In particular,
it is a major Australian refuge for many kinds of tropical birds.
  Birds of prey range widely over the Park, differing in size from large,
majestic wedgetailed eagles Aquila audax to small, but lightning quick,
collared sparrowhawks Accipiter cirrhocephalus. Black kites Milvus migrans
are the most common birds of prey in the Park. Possibly the most frequent
bird sound heard in the dry season is the shrill cry of the ubiquitous
whistling kites Haliastur sphenurus, gliding gracefully or circling on thermal
air currents on the look-out for carrion. Letter winged kites Elanus scriptus,
a relatively rare species, are present in the Park and are most active at
night, when they may be seen hunting over the floodplains for rodents. The
discovery of a small breeding pupulation at Kakadu extended the previously
known range in the Northern Territory by several hundred kilometres. Both
grey and white phases of grey goshawks Accipiter novaehollandiae occur in
wooded areas. Rare red goshawks Erythrotriorchis radiatus, which feed mainly
on other birds, are largely restricted to the sandstone woodland. White
breasted sea eagles Haliaeetus leucogaster are often seen singly or in pairs
perched on trees overlooking billabongs or flying with strong, leisurely
wing beats along waterways in search of unsuspecting fish on which they
swoop and catch them in their talons.
  Along the coast and on the tidal flats there is a great variety of birds.
Some are all year residents, others are migratory, mainly returning from
more northerly or southerly latitudes at the onset of the wet or the dry
season. The coastal bird fauna includes boobies, cormorants, curlews, egrets,
greenshanks, herons, ospreys, oyster catchers, plovers, rails, stilts,
sandpipers, terns and turnstones.
  The mangrove swamps are important roosting and breeding sites for many
bird species, including colonial nesters such as egrets and cormorants.
Some birds are largely confined to the mangroves. Examples of these are
mangrove kingfishers Halycon chloris, mangrove robins Eopsaltria pulverulenta,
chestnut rails Eulabeornis castaneoventris, white breasted whistlers
Pachycephala lanioides, yellow white eyes Zosterops lutea, large billed
warblers Gerygone magnirostris and mangrove warblers G. levigaster. Mangrove
warblers are noteworthy for their sustained sweet song and compact pear-shaped
nests, made of bark, grass stems and seaweed neatly bound together with
spider web, and usually seen suspended from leafy mangrove branches.
  Because of their variety and profusion much interest has centred on
waterbirds. At nesting time the breeding grounds, hidden amidst the dense
sedge and grass cover of the floodplains, resound with the noise of geese
and ducks. The populations of some waterbird species, although abundant
in Kakadu, are largely restricted in Asutralia to a narrow band along the
northern coastline. Typical of these are magpie geese Anseranas semipalmata,
green pygmy geese Nettapus pulchellus, Burdekin ducks or Radjah shelducks
Tadorna radjah and water whistling ducks Dendrocygna arcuata.
  Some waterbirds common at Kakadu are relatively widespread in Australia,
for instance jabiru storks Xenorhynchus asiaticus, the namesake of Jabiru
town with enormous spear-like beaks to catch fish, and lotus birds or
lilytrotters Irediparra gallinacea, whose long hind toes enable them to
walk on water weeds and which build their nests on floating vegetation.
Other widespread species include pelicans Pelecanus conspicillatus and darters
Anhinga melanogaster, sometimes called snake birds because of their resemblance
to snakes when swimming submerged with the head and neck above water.
Cormorants, egrets, herons and ibis abound. Nankeen or rufous night herons
Nycticorax caledonicus are very common along the watercourses. Recently
a large rookery of this heron, with as many as 2000 nesting birds, was
discovered in rainforest at Kakadu.  


</sample>
