<sample>
	<id> H04 </id>
	


	<note> 2002 words </note>
	


	<source> Passenger coach safety: report of the House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Transport Safety  </source>
	


	<h> CHAPTER THREE </h>
	

	<h> MECHANICAL SAFETY </h>
	


	<h> Introduction </h>
	

55.      Claims have been made that the strong competition in
the coach industry has resulted in a reduction in the
mechanical safety of vehicles. However, the entry of new 
operators between 1980 and 1984 has resulted in a substantial
reduction in the age profile of the express coach fleet, which
has served to improve the overall standard of mechanical
safety. The major long established operators have undertaken
major fleet upgrading with the purchase of new coaches during
1984. Before the entry of the new operators the established
operators were running older fleets, with the average age of
coaches used by one operator being around 10 to 12 years. The
average fleet age at the end of 1984 was about 2 to 3 years.

56.      Design standards for buses are specified by Australian
Design Rules (ADRs) and Consolidated Draft Regulations (CDRs),
which are formulated by the Australian Transport Advisory
Council (ATAC). ADRs are national mandatory standards for all
new buses while CDRs are used by States and Territories as a
model for their individual regulations. ADRs specify
technically complex standards for safety features or for the
control of motor vehicle emissions and noise. Laboratory
procedures are required in order to test for compliance with
ADRs.

57.      It is felt that with some exceptions existing design
standards provide a relatively high level of passenger
protection, apart from a few deficiencies in the matters of
seating, brakes, tyres and roll-over strength which will be
discussed later in this chapter.

58.      Some concern was raised during the Inquiry as to the
standard of imported buses. It was claimed that some states
will register these vehicles without a compliance plate and
that many vehicles are falling short of current safety
standards. All imported buses, including second hand vehicles,
should meet current ADRs at the time of importation. It is
essential that all imported buses are assessed for compliance
with current ADRs before customs clearance and that compliance
regulations be strictly enforced by the vehicle registration
authorities. The Committee recommends that:

	the Minister for Industry, Technology and Commerce 
	ensure that all imported trucks and buses, including 
	second hand vehicles, meet current Australian Design 
	Rules at the time of importation.


	<h> Tyres </h>
	

59.      Tyres are vital to the safe operation of all road
vehicles. It is essential that the use of sub-standard tyres
does not jeopardise the safety of the vehicle. Tyres can be
sub-standard because of poor manufacture or design,
inappropriate*inappropiate use or simply wear and tear.

60.      Adequate standards are needed for new vehicle tyres.
At present there is no ADR for tyres on new heavy vehicles,
including buses. The only tyre standards for buses are those
set down in the CDRs, which specify only very general
requirements. The need for an ADR for commercial vehicle tyres
is currently under review.

61.      The Road Safety Committee's 1977 Report on Heavy
Vehicle Safety recommended that a program of research be
implemented with a view to the drafting of an ADR on heavy
vehicle tyres. The Government accepted this recommendation in
broad principle but indicated that the Advisory Committee on
Safety in Vehicle Design (ACSVD) had advised that because of
the expense of research programs an analysis of truck accident
data was needed to identify the problem areas before a research
program could be recommended. It would appear that this long-
term project has not been completed.

62.      While ADRs can regulate tyres on new vehicles they
cannot be used to ensure the quality of replacement tyres.
Controlling replacement tyres, not only for buses but for all
vehicles, is at least as important as a mandatory standard for
original tyres.

63.      The Federal Office of Road Safety supports the
introduction of an ADR for tyres on heavy vehicles and a
control mechanism for replacement tyres. Although the Committee
is not aware of any deficiencies in new tyres for these
vehicles it feels that to ensure performance characteristics
of tyres an ADR is warranted. The Committee therefore reaffirms
the conclusions from the Heavy Vehicle Report and recommends
that:

    (a) the Minister for Transport seek the cooperation of the
	States and Territories through the Australian Transport
	Advisory Council to prepare standards in the form of an
	Australian Design Rule for heavy vehicle tyres.

    (b) the Minister for Transport and the Attorney-General ensure
	that all tyre standards in Australian Design Rules be
	incorporated in a Product Safety Standard under the Trade
	Practices Act.

This latter recommendation would include car tyres as well as
heavy vehicle tyres.

64.      Ensuring the quality of new tyres through mandatory
standards is administratively easier than the next step, which
is ensuring that tyres are replaced when they become
unserviceable through wear and tear. Heavy vehicle tyres should
be safe when operated within their recommended service
limitations. It has been suggested that the most effective way
to avoid accidents due to tyre failure would be for regulatory
authorities to ensure that vehicle users maintain and operate
tyres according to the manufacturers' recommendations,
particularly those standards recommended by the Australian Tyre
and Rim Association.

65.      One TWU witness claimed that replacing new tyres on
vehicles with older, worn tyres is a common practice within the
industry. He claimed that a &quot;baldy back dual-wheel tyre would
be put on the inside where it could not be seen&quot;. However,
these claims were contradicted by several other drivers. One
driver who had been employed by one company for 6.5 years and
who drove about 9,000 kms a week, told the Committee that he
had experienced only one blowout during this time. Other
drivers said that the number of skids, flat tyres or blowouts
that they had encountered during their driving careers had been
minimal. One operator advised that only new tyres were fitted
as replacement tyres as these were more economic than retreads.
Although the Committee was provided with no evidence to support
the views expressed by the TWU it is nevertheless concerned
that replacement tyres are not regulated.

66.      The Road Safety Committee's 1980 Report on Tyre Safety
concluded that tyres are a causative factor in only a
relatively small proportion of accidents in Australia, while
at the same time commenting on the inadequacy of the available
data. It was suggested that tyres may play a more important
role in accidents than existing data generally suggest.

67.      To ensure that sub-standard tyres are not being used
on vehicles, and thereby reducing safety, it is important that
there are mechanisms available to monitor the standards of
tyres in use.

This is only possible through inspection procedures. Random
inspections are the most effective way of detecting the use of
worn or otherwise substandard tyres. Tyres can become
unserviceable between registration inspections. It is also
possible that inspections at the time of vehicle registration
may not detect such tyres as operators would have the
opportunity of removing these tyres and replacing them with
newer ones. Some witnesses claimed that such practices do in
fact take place. If there is any truth to these allegations,
a strong system of random inspections would detect those
operators using unroadworthy tyres on vehicles. This is
particularly necessary for commercial vehicles, such as
coaches, travelling large distances between registration
inspections.


	<h> Brakes </h>
	

68.      Since July 1980 the braking of buses has been
specified by ADR 35A, which is based largely on USA
regulations. Buses first registered before 1980 may not comply
with ADR 35A. However, a major review of heavy vehicle braking
is currently being undertaken by VSAC, which is assessing the
suitability of the latest Economic Commission for Europe (ECE)
braking regulations for their adoption as the ADR for braking.

69.      There have been significant developments in heavy
vehicle braking systems in recent years. More sophisticated
systems such as the anti-lock braking system (ABS) developed
by Mercedes Benz have been shown to significantly improve the
performance of heavy vehicles when braking. Road tests have
shown that the ABS greatly increases vehicle control in all
driving conditions and reduces stopping distances and skidding.
The ABS and other developments in braking should be looked at
closely in formulating a new ADR.

70.      The Heavy Vehicle Safety Report in 1977 recommended
that consideration should be given to making auxiliary braking
a requirement on all buses which may be used on long distance
touring. Although auxiliary braking for coaches has not been
made mandatory, most coaches have some form of auxiliary
braking fitted, such as an exhaust*exhuast brake. The Committee
was told that there would not be many vehicles operating
without such braking systems.

71.      The NRFII similarly concluded that immediate attention
be given to the fitting of auxiliary braking systems, further
reinforcing the conclusion reached by the Heavy Vehicle Report
in 1977. Requiring all buses to be fitted with auxiliary*auxilliary
braking will not be a burden to the industry. Making auxiliary*auxilliary
braking mandatory will require that they be kept in working
order.

72.      The Committee recommends that:

	the Minister for Transport seek the cooperation of the
	Australian Transport Advisory Council to give immediate
	consideration to making auxiliary braking systems mandatory 
	for all heavy vehicles.


	<h> Structural strength </h>
	

73.      In Australia there are no statutory requirements for
the structural strength of the body and chassises*chasses of buses. The
main reason for this appears to be the high cost which would
be involved in determining a standard, which of course involves
crash testing of vehicles. The roll-over strength of buses is
receiving considerable attention in Europe, but as yet there
is no clear definition of appropriate standards. Most witnesses
agreed that Australia should await the conclusion of overseas
research and the resulting requirements because of the very
high cost which is involved in this research.

74.      At present structural strength is determined basically
by calculation and by a certain amount of rig testing. Although
there is no crash testing, sections of vehicles are destroyed
to enable the estimation of the general strength of a body as
a complete body.

75.      The Committee was told that Australian coaches are
more strongly constructed than those in Europe because of the
more damaging effects of many Australian roads on buses. It was
stated that there is &quot;no doubt that the roll-over strength of
Australian buses would be better than those constructed in
Europe&quot;.

76.      Although the Committee does not question this
statement, it is concerned that there are no standards or codes
of practice in Australia to ensure that the roll-over strength
of buses is adequate. While there is a need for a standard to
be determined, the Committee realises that there would be
problems in having a standard which was incompatible with those
in other relevant countries or which requires impact testing
for compliance. While any delay in the implementation of a
suitable standard should be avoided, the Committee recognises
the advantages of waiting for the European standard. However,
it is also important that the standards developed overseas will
be suited to the different conditions experienced by vehicles
in Australia. The Committee recommends that:

	the Minister for Transport in cooperation with the
	Australian Transport Advisory Council:

	(a) monitor European developments on standards for 
	    bus roll-over strength to assess their suitability 
	    for adoption in Australia.

	(b) develop and implement as soon as possible an Australian
	    Design Rule setting standards for bus roll-over strength.


	<h> Seating </h>
	

77.      The importance of strong seat anchorages and seat
structures in buses is self-evident, however, design
deficiencies in this area have been noted by several witnesses.

78.      The 1977 Heavy Vehicle Safety Report drew attention
to the practice by which some bus seats are secured to the
plywood floor with bolts which would pull out at a load of
about 100kg. In a minor front-end accident it was alleged that
all the seats in the bus would pull out from the floor. As well
as not restraining passengers, the seat anchorage fittings
would then be in a position*postition to cause injury to
passengers.

79.      A study on seating requirements revealed relatively
low levels of energy absorption in the tests conducted on seats
being fitted to Australian buses at that time. 


</sample>
