4. Impact on manufacturers' input prices and costs 4.1 Introduction 

The depreciation of the Australian dollar is expected to
influence the manufacturing sector in a number of respects.
First, imported goods which are close substitutes for
domestically produced goods are a source of actual and
potential competition for local manufacturers. To the extent
that prices of competitive imports are raised by the
depreciation, this provides domestic producers of import-
competing goods with a relative price advantage. Secondly, many
manufacturers use imported inputs in their production
activities, either in the form of capital goods (machinery and
equipment) or intermediate goods (raw materials, semi-processed
materials, and components). In so far as the depreciation leads
to higher domestic currency prices of imported goods, the
production costs of local manufacturers are thereby raised
directly.

In this chapter, consideration is given to the magnitude of the
price increases charged by overseas suppliers of materials and
components to domestic manufacturers following the
depreciation, and the speed with which the price increases were
transmitted. In seeking to explain differences in these price
changes across industries, information is provided on the
countries from which the imports were sourced, the currencies
in which the contracts were denominated, and the order and
payment lags involved.

One benefit expected from a depreciation is that the resultant
change in relative prices should lead to a switch in demand
away from imported goods to relatively less expensive
domestically produced substitutes. Findings are presented on
how volumes of purchases of imported and domestically produced
materials and components by manufacturers changed following the
depreciation in 1985, and how they were expected to change
during the first half of 1986.

One factor which influences the extent to which manufacturers
switch their purchases is the degree of substitutability
between imported and domestically produced materials and
components. Accordingly, information is presented on the extent
to which such import substitution on the input side is feasible
for manufacturers, and some evidence provided of examples of
import substitution which have actually taken place as a result
of the depreciation.

Throughout the chapter, as well as attempting to gauge the
quantitative magnitude of the price changes and volume
responses, consideration is given to identifying the time lags
involved.


 4.2 Characteristics of the firms surveyed  

The 109 manufacturers who responded to the survey were
classified to industry groups on the basis of their predominant
activity. The number of firms in each industry group are given
in Table 4.1, and the distribution by employment size is shown
in Table 4.2.

As noted in Chapter 1, in selecting the sample of firms, more
emphasis was placed on those firms which use imports as inputs
in their production processes and/or whose output is
competitive with imports. While the coverage of firms across
industries may therefore not be fully representative of the
output structure of manufacturing, it is nevertheless thought
to be satisfactory for the purposes of this study. Further,
while a very small proportion of the respondent firms are
`small' (employing less than 100 persons), it is the reactions
of larger firms to the depreciation which have the greater
quantitative impact on output and employment changes, and for
this reason the study gives them greater coverage.

The effect of the depreciation on individual industries would
be expected to differ, depending on the extent to which they
are import-using and/or import-competing. Import usage will be
considered first.

The vast majority of the 109 manufacturing firms were engaged
in importing, either of materials and components for use in
production and/or final goods to complement their product
range. In 1985, some forty-seven of the 109 manufacturers were
directly involved in both types of importing activity, thirty-
five firms imported materials and components only, and seven
firms imported final goods but not materials or components.
Only twenty of the 109 manufacturers did not engage in any
direct importing activity.

In order to assess how important the use of imported inputs
(materials and components) is in manufacturing production,
information was sought on the cost structure of firms. The
relevant data are set out in Table 4.3.

For the ninety-two manufacturers imported inputs accounted, on
average, for around 21 per cent of production costs in 1985,
while domestically produced inputs accounted for around 36 per
cent. However, considerable differences are apparent across
industries in the relative share of costs accounted for by
these two categories of inputs. Imported materials and
components accounted, on average, for a relatively small share
of costs (less than 10 per cent) in Non-metallic mineral
products and Basic metal products, but represented one-quarter
or more of total production costs in five industries -
Textiles, Chemical products, Transport equipment, Appliances
and electrical equipment, and Industrial machinery and
equipment. Domestically produced materials and components were
used most intensively in Wood, wood products and furniture,
Paper and paper products, Basic metal products, and Fabricated
metal products.

  

In order to provide additional information on the distribution
of the share of imported inputs in total production costs of
manufacturers, firms were assigned to the categories listed in
Table 4.4. For 19 per cent of firms imported inputs accounted
for less than 5 per cent of costs, whereas at the other extreme
they accounted for one-third or more of costs in approximately
25 per cent of firms.

In addition to undertaking the importation of materials and
components, many manufacturers also engage in importing final
goods. Information on the share of domestic sales in 1984-85
accounted for by domestically produced goods, and imported
final goods, was provided by all but two of the 109
manufacturers (Table 4.5). For the majority of firms, imports
of final goods represented only a very minor share (less than
5 per cent) of total sales. However, for about one-quarter of
the firms they accounted for 10 per cent or more of domestic
sales, and for two firms more than 50 per cent.

Turning now to the extent of import competition faced by local
manufacturers, two important determinants of the extent to
which an industry is import-competing are (l) the proportion
of imports which compete with domestic production, and (2) the
proportion of the domestic sales of the industry accounted for
by competitive imports. The latter variable (market penetration
by competitive imports) is conventionally used as an indicator
of the degree of actual import competition faced by domestic
sellers in an industry. However, firm behaviour is also
influenced by the threat of potential import competition.

Information on the relative importance of competitive and non-
competitive imports across industries, together with the market
penetration of competitive imports, is presented in Table 4.6. 
The definitions of competitive and non-competitive imports
are those used by the IAC. Non-competitive imports are defined
as those which attract minimum rates of duty (2.5 per cent or
less), including those which enter under by-law concessions.
It is reasonable to assume that higher tariff duties have not
been imposed on such goods because there is no domestic
production of close substitutes. Non-competitive imports mainly
comprise capital equipment, materials and components, and some
consumer durables. Competitive imports on the other hand are
those which enter at higher rates of duty (2.5 per cent or
more), and which tend to compete more closely with domestic
output.

At the broad industry group level, market penetration by
competitive imports is most important in Textiles, Clothing and
footwear, Transport equipment, Appliances and electrical
equipment, Industrial machinery and equipment, and Other
manufacturing. Of course, a more finely disaggregated industry
classification would reveal instances of significant import
competition within some of the other broad industry groupings.

 4.3 Prices of imported materials and components  

The extent to which domestic manufacturers have experienced a
competitive advantage as a result of the depreciation of the
Australian dollar is dependent on the pricing responses of
importers of competing goods, and the impact of the
depreciation on domestic costs of production. One aspect of the
latter is the extent to which the prices of imported materials
and components have increased as a result of the depreciation.

Over any given period, changes in landed duty-paid prices of
imports can reflect a variety of factors - for example,
movements in exchange rates, fob prices in foreign currencies,
freight and insurance costs, and tariff rates. The dramatic
fall in the Australian dollar which began in February 1985 was
clearly the most important factor which affected price changes
of imported materials and components during 1985. However,
Australian dollar prices of imports may not change by the full
extent of the depreciation if overseas suppliers choose to
absorb some or all of the effect of the exchange rate change
by reducing their Australian export prices in terms of their
own currency.

 4.3.1 Changes in prices of imported materials and components  

Of the eighty-two manufacturing firms directly importing
materials and components, sixty-six provided information on how
prices of these inputs changed during 1985, and how prices were
expected to change during the first half of 1986. The half-
yearly and annual information is presented in Figure 4.1, while
the more detailed quarterly data are set out in Appendix Table
A4.1. Seventy-seven firms provided data on price movements for
all imported inputs used, i.e. those imported directly and also
those purchased from local importers. Because the price changes
in both series were very similar, only the direct imports data
are presented.

Across all firms, the most substantial changes in prices paid
for imported inputs took place in the first half of 1985. On
average, prices increased at a rate of 7.1 per cent in the
March quarter, and 8.3 per cent over the June quarter, giving
a compound rate of 16.0 per cent for the first half of 1985.

The rate of increase in the prices of imported inputs moderated
somewhat in the second half of 1985. Over the full year, prices
of imported inputs increased, on average, by 26 per cent. The 
rate of increase is expected to slow still further over the
first half

  

of 1986. For this period, the firms surveyed expected prices
of imported inputs to rise at a rate of only about one-third
that of the first half of 1985.

There are substantial interindustry differences in the
magnitude of price increases charged by overseas suppliers to
domestic manufacturers following the depreciation. Price
increases appear to have been well above average in Wood, wood
products and furniture, and Appliances and electrical
equipment. The speed with which price increases for imported
inputs took place is also of considerable interest. A measure
of the speed of price adjustment is provided by the ratio of
the first quarter price increase to the annual increase. On
this basis, price increases were transmitted relatively quickly
in Textiles, Fabricated metal products, Transport equipment,
Appliances and electrical equipment, and Industrial machinery
and equipment (refer Appendix Table A4.1). For these
industries, approximately one-third or more of the annual
increase was passed on within the first quarter of 1985. The
largest impact was felt after a lag of at least one quarter in
Wood, wood products and furniture, Paper and paper products,
Chemical products, and Basic metal products.

 4.3.2 Sourcing of imports of materials and components  

The observed price increases for imported materials and
components faced by manufacturers reflect, in part, the
different countries of origin of these imports and the
different degrees of absorption of the effects of the
depreciation by overseas suppliers. To shed some light on these
aspects, an examination is made of the countries from which the
imports of the respondent firms were sourced, and the extent
to which the Australian dollar depreciated against the
currencies of these countries.

The major countries from which imports of materials and
components were sourced by the respondent firms in 1985 are set
out in Table 4.7. Across all industries, the major source
countries were the United States, Japan and West Germany. Other
countries tended to be important only in particular industries - 
for example, New Zealand in Textiles and Paper and paper
products, Canada in Non-metallic mineral products and Paper and
paper products, and Asian countries in Clothing and footwear.

