<sample>
	<id> H13 </id>
	


	<note> 2001 words </note>
	


	<source> Report of the committee to review library services in South Australia </source>
	


	<h> CHAPTER 3 </h>
	

	<h> SECOND STAGE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME </h>
	

3.1 The 1978 Report recommended that a State Plan be adopted to
develop 99 public libraries throughout South Australia over an
eight year period. (Recommendation 20). The Development Programme
to achieve this State plan has been highly successful, even though
not all libraries proceeded in the shape or in the time frame as
planned. Appendix II compares the proposed and actual progress of
the Development Programme from 1978/79 to 1985/86.

The Development Programme has had to be extended to 1986/87 because
of the increased number of independent service points sought. This
occurred in the school/community library area where the number will
have increased from twenty eight to forty six by the end of the
Programme. District Councils clearly preferred the static library
alternative to the regional mobiles initially proposed. Despite the
increase in the number of service points and the year's extension
to the Programme, the overall capital estimate provided in 1978 has
proved to be extremely accurate. It is a credit both to the
Department of Local Government and the Libraries Board that costs
have been so closely aligned to the original budget, bearing in
mind both the inflation rate and, more recently, the devaluation
of the Australian dollar.

3.2 At the time of preparation of this Report, only five District
Councils have not yet decided to establish library services under
the Development Programme, (Appendix III). Negotiations are
currently underway with several of these District Councils,
Yankalilla, Gumeracha, Mt. Pleasant and Robertstown and the
Committee anticipates that services will be established in 1986/87.
Three other councils, the District Councils of Carrieton,
Peterborough and Hallett, are too small to establish services in
their own right. Of these three, Hallett appears likely to seek a
service from an adjoining council when the two Institutes within
its boundaries dissolve.

Only one metropolitan council does not contribute to a library
service. However, we believe the Glenelg Council has approved in
principle the development of a public library service but has not,
to this time, made any commitment as to its location.

3.3 The Committee considers the above scenario to be a remarkable
overall achievement. In all cases local government authorities were
free to make their own decisions as to whether or not to provide
a public library service. The success of the spread of public
library services throughout the State is due in no small measure
to the persuasive skills of the Libraries Board and Public
Libraries Branch officers in the first instance and more
importantly to the success of the first few libraries established.
It was quite evident to the Committee that the stanard of service
offered and the level of use made by the community were clearly
very influential factors in convincing neighbouring authorities
that a public library was a desirable community service.

The support for this Development Programme and its extension was
shown in the large number of submissions received from local
authorities by the Committee. Sixty one of the State's 125 local
authorities made submissions.

3.4 The Committee has identified the need for a smaller second
stage Development Programme which would provide for:

    (1) replacement or extension of existing service points      
        which are now inadequate or too small                    
    (2) new services in areas where population growth is        
        expected to occur over the next five to ten years.

In the first stage of the Development Programme, the Board was keen
to establish services wherever it could. In same cases existing
Institute buildings or rented shops were used because no other
suitable alternative premises were available at the time. The
Committee believes consideration should now be given to improving
these library services because in most cases conditions are
cramped, with little public space and with books stored in such a
way that public use is severely restricted. In most instances, the
councils involved recognise the problem and are anxious to find a
remedy.

The Committee envisages a total of twenty six projects during this
second stage. In addition, Penola, Prospect and Jamestown Councils
have indicated a need for minor capital developments. Some
school/community libraries, especially in the north and west of the
State, are also in need of additional space. These costs are
relatively small and if proceeded with, would have a negligible
financial effect on the total programme.

3.5 Although there is clearly a need for extensions or replacements
of the library services identified, the situation is certainly not
as critical as it was in 1978, when relatively few library services
existed. Most councils have indicated that they see such projects
as part of their own forward plans. A similar situation exists with
new libraries. In all cases library services exist in these areas,
either through a neighbouring library or mobile service.

If a second stage Development Programme was implemented over eight
years, the number of libraries to be built or redeveloped each year
would be less than half those currently being established. Although
this slower growth rate will represent a substantial reduction in
the cost to the State Government, it will be offset to some extent
by the Committee's proposal to increase the establishment capital
subsidy as detailed in our Review of the Subsidy System.

13. The committee recommends that:

The State Government accept a commitment to a second stage capital
Development Programme to be implemented over an eight year period,
to provide in the first instance an opportunity for existing
libraries with inadequate space to be expanded or replaced and
secondly, for new libraries to be established in areas of forecast
population growth. Estimated capital cost for 1987 - 1996 is
$4,456,275.


	<h> Joint-Use Libraries </h>
	

3.6 South Australia has been a standard bearer for joint-use
services, with more services provided in this State than all other
States combined. The success of such services here, the Committee
believes, is due to the sound policy framework and the planning and
operation standards that have been applied. A Joint-Use Libraries
Advisory Committee considers all applications in relation to the
policy guidelines before making recommendations to the Libraries
Board. The School/Community Libraries Committee has also been very
successful as the establishment vehicle for new libraries in rural
areas and has carefully monitored their performance.

The Committee was impressed with the consistency in the standards
of services provided from joint-use libraries when compared with
separate public libraries. This was particularly noticeable in the
country areas where school/community libraries offered a cheaper,
but nevertheless highly satisfactory service. The levels of public
membership and use were indistinguishable between the two types of
libraries.

3.7 Joint-Use Library Services with T.A.F.E. colleges have also
prospered. Twelve examples of co-operative provision with local
government were noted, most of which have involved placing a
college or branch library collection in a neighbouring public
library for community use. In four localities, however,
comprehensive joint college and public library services have been
established on college premises and a fifth service is in the
process of being established. In particular, the success of the
Noarlunga Library has demonstrated that, even in large metropolitan
communities, such joint-use is able to offer additional dimensions
of service not otherwise available, either to the colleges
concerned or to the general public. Other joint-use services
involving T.A.F.E. colleges may occur in the future, depending on
developmental priorities in T.A.F.E. and the location of future
colleges.

3.8 The Committee has carried out a needs analysis for future joint
use libraries. A survey of schools in the metropolitan area was
undertaken to establish possible joint ventures. A number of
possibilities were considered, but at this stage, only the Magill
and Morphett Vale East sites are currently under consideration.
Possibilities also exist for joint developments in Thebarton, Tea
Tree Gully at Golden Grove, Happy Valley and in the Munno Para City
Council as populations expand.

3.9 The Committee noted that the potential public use of joint-use
libraries in the metropolitan area was restricted by up to 40%
where a site away from a major retail shopping area was chosen. In
many cases potential school sites did not have the benefit of good
location and had to be rejected on these grounds. In these cases,
the cost savings from a joint-service would have been negated by
a much restricted level of use.

Location did not have the same significance in country areas where
school/Community libraries up to one kilometre from the town centre
still showed high levels of use.

14.The Committee recommends that:

Where opportunities are presented, both councils and appropriate
Government Departments seriously consider establishing joint-use
or multi-use services because of the benefits to the community and
the total cost-savings that result.


3.10 The Committee considered the future development of the
school/community libraries programme and noted the Education
Department's concern over the escalation in cost due to the
increase in the number of services from twenty eight to forty six.
The Committee has addressed this problem in detail and our
recommendations for change are given in the chapter on School
Community Libraries.

The Committee does not foresee any further school/community
libraries being built, except possibly Roxby Downs. All remaining
unserved communities in the unincorporated areas are too small even
for a school/community library.


	<h> Country Lending Service </h>
	

3.11 The small communities and individual homesteads not directly
served by their own public library service currently receive
library materials from the Country Lending Service of the State
Library's Lending Service. As a result of the development
programme, the number of borrowers requiring this service has
steadily declined from 10,867 in 1978 to 646 in 1985.

The Committee envisages that by 1987/88, the number of people
eligible to continue receiving the service will be less than one
hundred. It will be appropriate at that stage to transfer the
responsibility for the provision of the service from the centrally
provided Country Lending Service to the most appropriate local
library.

The Committee notes that to same extent, this is already occurring
in the case of some libraries bordering the outback. Port Augusta,
Peterborough and Coober Pedy have reported a number of such users.
The Committee considers that additional financial support should
be provided to councils where such mail services need to be
provided.

15. The Committee recommends that:

The mailing service presently operated by the Country Lending
Service of the State Library be transferred in 1987/88 to the
appropriate public library, and a grant based on the present method
of paying for library services to unincorporated areas, be made to
local libraries providing this service.


	<h> Institutes </h>
	

3.12 One of the major changes resulting from the 1978 Report was
the decision to phase out the Institute subscription library
service in favour of free public libraries. The 1978*]978 Report
considered that the free and wide ranging service being offered by
public libraries would more effectively meet the needs of the
community. This has been clearly demonstrated by the membership of
public libraries which now stands at 562,000, over thirty six times
the Institute membership in 1978.

The implementation of the Development Programme has relied very
much on the co-operation of both the Institutes Association and
the individual Institutes themselves. In many cases the dissolution
of a long standing Institute library causes a great deal of sadness
amongst its members. In all cases however, the dissolutions have
come about voluntarily and considerable efforts have been made to
ensure a smooth transition of services to former Institute members.

In some eighteen cases, predominantly in the metropolitan area,
the local Institute has continued to operate as a private library
relying on the &quot;box book scheme&quot; which is a circulating collection
operated by the Institute association. Financial support has been
provided through membership subscriptions and invested funds.

3.13 Once the public libraries approved in the final stage of the development 
programme are opened, twenty-one subsidised Institutes will remain.
Of these, at the most eight, and more likely four, are expected to 
continue after 1986/87. Already the viability of the &quot;box book scheme&quot;
is causing concern and it is unlikely that sufficient income will be 
generated from the remaining Institutes in 1986/87 for it to continue
beyond that date.   


</sample>
