<sample>
	<id> H24 </id>
	


	<note> 2026 words </note>
	


	<source> Aboriginal land rights. House of Representatives. 18 March 1986. </source>
	


	<h> Ministerial Statement </h>
	
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports - Minister for Aboriginal Affairs) - by 
leave - Honourable members will be aware that, on 3 March, last I 
announced a number of decisions that the Government made concerning 
Aboriginal land rights and related matters. It is appropriate that 
I should inform the House of those decisions. For the information 
of honourable members let me outline the recent course of events. 
In February last year the Government released for public discussion 
a draft set of proposals for a national Aboriginal land rights model. 
This model was the result of almost two years of consultation with
members of a panel of Aboriginal leaders consisting of representatives 
of land councils and members of the then National Aboriginal Conference. 

  Following consideration by the Government of some 260 submissions from 
interested parties, I was able to announce in August last year that the 
Government had endorsed the principles contained in the model as an 
appropriate, reasonable and balanced basis for Aboriginal land rights 
throughout Australia. At the same time the Government also made clear 
its preference for land rights to be implemented by State action
broadly consistent with the Commonwealth's principles rather than by 
overriding legislation. Therefore I had a specific direction from 
Cabinet to engage in discussions with the States to see what action 
could be taken on a State by State basis. That position was clear and 
unequivocal and was well known to Aboriginal leadership who in many 
cases rejected the proposed model. Of course this Government accepts 
that the 1967 referendum I gave the Commonwealth a special and overriding
responsibility for the welfare of Aboriginal people. We have embraced 
that responsibility. 

  Since coming to office, this Government has increased spending
on programs for Aboriginal advancement, through my portfolio
and those of a number of my colleagues, by over two-thirds.
Responsibility for Aboriginal advancement does not, as some
would believe, lie solely with the Commonwealth as a result of
the 1967 referendum. It is a shared responsibility. Aborigines
are citizens of the States like everybody else. They are
entitled to look to the States to provide them with those basic
services that State governments normally provide to their
citizens.

  In the course of my negotiations with the States, it was made
clear to them that the Commonwealth regarded it as imperative
that the States should be prepared to grant secure title to
Aboriginal citizens in respect of land which they had
traditionally occupied. That is still this Government's
position. I am sure that it would come as no surprise that no
State government has suggested to me that the Commonwealth
should take pre-emptive action in this matter. While their
motives may have varied considerably, the underlying premise
is clear; Tasmania aside, the States accept that they have a
responsibility. Acceptance of that responsibility has seen
progress made in the provision of secure title to Aboriginal
people.

  In New South Wales, legislation was introduced in 1983 which
transferred to local Aboriginal land councils approximately
171 square kilometres of land. That legislation also provides
for claims to be made over certain Crown land, and earmarks
funds for future land acquisition. Last year the Acting Premier
informed the Prime Minister (Mr Hawke) that he believed that
his State's legislation adequately meets the needs of the
Aboriginal citizens of New South Wales and there was no need
for either the preferred model or any other overriding
legislation. That view was strongly endorsed by both the
Secretary of the State Ministry for Aboriginal Affairs, Ms Pat
O'Shane, and the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council.


  Discussions between the Commonwealth and Victorian governments
have led to a broad in-principle agreement on the question of
land rights in that State. The Victorian Government has
prepared legislation for the handing over of title to
Framlingham Reserve and other related legislation, the basic
details of which have been discussed and agreed between the
Victorian Government and ourselves. An all-party parliamentary
committee of the Victorian Parliament has also reported to the
Government on the question of compensation for dispossession.
While this report is directed to the problems of Victorian
Aboriginal people, it deals with very important principles
which are of immense relevance to all Aboriginal people living
in urban or regional fringe situations and whose rights would
not be significantly benefited by any land rights legislation.
I am involved in discussions with the Victorian Government
about the role that the Commonwealth might be expected to play
in the development of the principles outlined in that report.

  I refer next to South Australia. Large areas of that State have
been transferred to Aboriginal ownership. In 1981, title to
100,000 square kilometres in the north-west of the State passed
to the Pitjantjatjara people. In 1984, similar legislation
provided for Aboriginal ownership of 76,000 square kilometres
of Maralinga lands. This legislation was finally passed by the
Legislative Council of South Australia after the threat of
Commonwealth intervention. A land trust holds title to other
reserves in that State. Having lived with land rights
legislation both major political parties are agreed as to its
benefits. The South Australian Leader of the Opposition 
endorsed the position of the Premier of South Australia when he
said recently of land rights legislation in that State: `We
have good, fair, workable land rights here'. He is right.

  In Queensland, discussions have continued with the Minister for
Community Services, who has indicated his Government's
intention to issue deeds of grants in trust to all reserve
communities and to provide those communities with an
administrative structure based on the principles of local
government. It is the intention of the Queensland Minister that
reserve communities have control over their own economic and
social affairs within three years. The Queensland Minister and
I have agreed with reserve council chairmen that working
parties representing Commonwealth, State and Aboriginal reserve
community interests should address the details of establishing
such a structure on a community by community basis. Working
parties should address themselves to a range of concerns, from
the ownership of stock and plant to the payment of award wages
and law and order issues.

  In the Torres Strait Islands, the Prime Minister and I met with
Islander leadership and addressed their concerns for self-
management. Following these discussions, and on the basis of
the Queensland Government issuing the deeds of grant in trust,
it was agreed that the Commonwealth would provide funding for
both water and electricity supplies as well as financial 
assistance to enable the devolution of self-management through
the Islander consultative council. This will involve the
training of Islanders in responsibilities which are presently
carried out by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. The
facilities of the Department will be made available to this new
self-management structure. As there is comparatively little
unalienated Crown land in Queensland, legislation based on the
preferred model would be of limited benefit to the great
majority of Aborigines living outside reserves. The needs of
this group will have to be addressed by other policies and
initiatives based upon the principle of compensation for
dispossession.

  In Western Australia, efforts to legislate for land rights were
defeated by the conservative forces in the gerrymandered
Legislative Council, aided by a disgraceful campaign of
fearmongering by the mining industry. However, following recent
negotiations with the Western Australian Government, that
Government has indicated its concern to meet the land needs of
Aboriginal people through the following arrangements, the main
features of which are: The State will provide secure title to
Aboriginal reserves by way of long term leases for a minimum
of 99 years; 45 other reserves under the control of the State
Department of Community Services also will be transferred to
Aboriginal control; the acquisition of further land is to be
the subject of discussion between the Commonwealth and the
Western Australian Government; the States will accelerate the
process of providing excisions from pastoral leases for living
areas for Aborigines, in conjunction with the churches, the
State will continue facilitating the transfer to Aboriginal
people of mission lands used for Aboriginal purposes;
Aboriginal groups in the Kimberley will benefit from the
proposed restructuring of the pastoral industry in that region
of Western Australia following the financial assistance from
the Commonwealth; Aboriginal advancement programs will continue
to receive emphasis; the Commonwealth is offering additional
funds averaging $10m a year, for a five year period, to
match the State's efforts under this new program; a committee
will be established to advise the State Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs on the terms and conditions on which entry permits will
be given for access to Aboriginal land for the purpose of
mineral exploration and mining; and an agreed basis for the
payment of mining royalty equivalents when mining takes place
on Aboriginal land.

  Cabinet has decided that this offer constitutes an acceptable
basis for detailed negotiations with the State Government.
Those negotiations are proceeding. I have already had
preliminary discussions with the new Western Australian 
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Mr Ernie Bridge. Aboriginal
leadership in Western Australia will also be involved in the
process of considering these proposals.             

  In Tasmania, the only progress that can be reported is the
recognition by the State Government of the existence of its
Aboriginal citizens. In that State the Government has been
stubborn in its refusal to take action beyond this simple
recognition. It has thus failed to further the interests of
this important group. While Aboriginal people in Tasmania would
be unable to lay claim on the basis of traditional ownership
to land, using criteria that apply under the Northern Territory
land rights legislation, there are still areas of special
significance, such as Oyster Cove and Wybalenna. Here again the
principles of compensation for dispossession as set out in the
Victorian parliamentary report may prove relevant. Aboriginal
people in Tasmania can be assured that their aspirations in
respect of such areas will be addressed by the Commonwealth
with the newly elected State Government.

  As the Prime Minister recently informed the National Press
Club, we will continue to negotiate with the States. We will
continue to seek to advance the interests of Aboriginal people
through co-operation with the States where that is possible.
Such an approach does not involve any diminution of
Commonwealth responsibility. Aboriginal people will enjoy a
better outcome, and sooner, in a much better social
environment, by means of such a process. Against this background 
of continuing dialogue and progress with the States the
Government has taken the view that the implementation of
legislation based on the preferred model is not warranted at
this time.

  I turn now to the Government's proposal to amend the Aboriginal
Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976, which I will bring
before the Parliament during the current sittings. It
should be recalled that in the Northern Territory when we came
to government there had been one review of the legislation
which had not been acted upon. Nor had any action been taken,
at either a State or*of Federal level, to deal with the problems
of Aboriginal people living under Third World conditions on
pastoral leases. A seven year freeze on exploration in the
Territory created a backlog of applications for exploration
licences that, when lifted, imposed a burden which made quick
responses from the Aboriginal land councils to mining proposals
impossible. In general terms the Act will be amended in accordance 
with the suggestions put forward by Mr Justice Toohey,
a former Aboriginal Land Commissioner, in his review of the
legislation which was tabled in this House on 5 March 1984. We
also have under consideration the proposals of Dr Jon Altman
in his review of the Aboriginals Benefit Trust Account.

  The Government received strong representations from Aboriginal
groups, the churches, community leaders and individuals
supporting the need for Aboriginals to be able to control
mining on their land in order that their spiritual and cultural
well-being might be protected. Against this background, and
bearing in mind the concerns which the Northern Territory
Government and the mining industry have with the veto in its
present form, the Government proposes to retain the essential
elements of the veto while introducing a number of changes to
its operation designed to reduce delay and uncertainty. 


</sample>
