Classics detectives trace ancient Athenians By Frank Campbell  

WHEN HONORATIANA POLYCHARMIS, a resident of Athens, who lived
in the 2nd century AD, claimed in a stone inscription that she
was descended from the statesman Perikles, who dominated
Athenian political life 600 years earlier, she may not have
been social climbing.
  Working from fragmentary stone inscriptions and literary
sources, Professor Michael Osborne, Professor of Classical
Studies at the University, has traced more than 200 relatives
of Perikles. The beginning of the family tree can be traced
back to the end of the 7th century BC.
  "It is just possible that Polycharmis was right," Professor
Osborne says. "If so, it would be interesting to know if her
family was as important in the 2nd Century AD as it was in the
5th Century BC, when Perikles flourished. We might know that
by the end of next year."
  Reconstruction of the Periklean family tree is a tiny part of
a major research program by Professor Osborne which could make
Melbourne University a world centre in ancient history
research.
  The aim of the research, which is being done in co-operation
with the British Academy, is to create a comprehensive
biographical dictionary of identifiable citizens and residents
of ancient Athens.
  Professor Osborne says at least 100,000 people (citizens,
slaves, criminals, and mercenaries) have been identified from
fragmentary stone inscriptions and literary sources.
Information about them is being fed into a computer and will
be published next year in two large works.
  One of the works - a lexicon of known Athenians - will be
published by Oxford University Press for the British Academy.
The second, which is to be published by Duckworth and
could run to 1200 pages, will be a comprehensive biographical
dictionary, containing information about the careers of each
of the 100,000 or so citizens and other residents of Athens
and an assessment of their importance in Athenian life. The two
books will serve as a reference source for scholars in ancient
history.
  Professor Osborne's main research is the reconstruction,
interpretation, and translation of the thousands of inscription
fragments, which have been recovered from archaeological
excavations over the past 200 years, and which are still being
discovered in considerable numbers. Many of them are in the
Epigraphical Museum in Athens. (Epigraphy is the study of
inscriptions).
  Some of the stones recovered from the excavations contain the
public records of ancient Athens. Professor Osborne plans to
publish the material for the years 336 BC to 50 BC with a 
translation and commentary, as "The Public Archive of 
Hellenistic Athens". The book will be illustrated by 
computer-drawn facsimiles of the stones and their inscriptions.
  "Reconstruction is a tricky task," he admits. "Most of the
stones are in very bad condition as the result of frequent re-
use since the original inscription."
  Professor Osborne explains that in ancient Athens anyone who
was a citizen had the right to vote at the Assembly. When the
Assembly reached a decision the Secretary of the Council was
instructed to see that the decision was inscribed on stone and
set up for everyone to see. "It was usually put in
a religious precinct, frequently on the Akropolis where, it
was believed, it had the protection of the appropriate god or
goddess," he says.
  "But later, when troubles affected Athens, many of the stones
were removed from the Akropolis, and, as time went by, were
used for a variety of purposes, some, for example, as rubble
for housing. Others were used as drain covers and building
material for fortifications. They became damaged and
fragmented. That's how we see them today."


The Department of Classical Studies at Melbourne University
has about 2000 impressions of these inscriptions. The
impressions, called `squeezes', are obtained by applying wet
filter paper to the surface of the stone inscription with a
brush. 

