RAIN, HAIL, BUT VERY LITTLE SUNSHINE  

     Following a tradition of four years, the Red Cross Calling
launch took place under rain laden clouds, but this year no one
minded as many of the crowd were already wet.
     The 1986 Red Cross Calling Appeal was launched at South
Maroubra Beach as part of the 1986 State Surf Life Saving
Championships. Mr Michael Cleary, Minister for Sport and
Recreation, and a member of the Surf Life Saving fraternity,
officially launched the appeal.
     Mr Cleary took the opportunity to thank Red Cross for its
work throughout the community, and to present the Chairman of
the Division, Dr David Storey, with a cheque on behalf of the
New South Wales Government, for $27,500.
     Organisers of the appeal chose to launch the Calling at
the beach to emphasise Red Cross' close association with Surf
Life Saving and first aid generally.
     For the past nine years, the Sydney Mobile Voluntary Aid
Detachment has provided first aid at the State championships.
     "We also supervise the first aid certification of members
of the Surf Life Saving Rescue Helicopter," said Mr John Smith,
Executive Director.
     "We are proud of the work Red Cross does in sporting
events, and wanted to recognise Sydney Mobile for their
continuous work in the community in the name of Red Cross."
     Although final figures will not be available until June,
the 1986 Red Cross Calling Appeal looks to reach its target of
1 1/2 million.
     For many areas throughout New South Wales, this was the
first year that the Red Cross Calling took place. Tumut was one
such town which expects to rule off its books with a total of
$3,800.
     "This is a superb effort from such a small town,
especially when you consider it was its first year," said Mr
Graham Karp, Supervisor of Red Cross Calling.
     "The Calling was arranged by the Tumut Red Cross branch,
and the organisers are as thrilled as we are.
     "Two other towns which deserve a special mention are Yass,
which raised $1,300, and the tiny town of Bookham which raised
$500."
     Once again, the Calling was organised by the Red Cross
branch in each town, and it was the first time the Calling had
been held.
     At the 1985 Annual Conference, mention was made of the
"family to a street" approach, which had been operating then
for two years in Hunters Hill, in Sydney.
     "Sue Hoopman, the originator of the approach, used it
again this year in her area, and is expected to break the
current record of $10,000 by $1,000.
     Mrs Lambell, from the Gulargambone branch, and zone
representative, used this approach in Dubbo this year. Dubbo
did not hold a Calling last year and in previous year's had
raised in the vicinity of $2,000-$3,000.
     This year the area raised $5,500 by using the family to
a street approach. Families were organised to collect in their
own street, and reports are that all who took part had a most
enjoyable time.
     "Figures have shown that those areas which have used this
approach raised more money than in previous years."
     But perhaps the most outstanding success story is of three
young high school boys, two from Fairfield and one from
Strathfield. Each boy raised $1,000 on their own for the
Calling Appeal.
     "I feel confident that this has never occurred, Mr Karp said. "It has restored my faith in human kind,
that three young people were willing to give up their time, and
work so hard."
     The Red Cross Calling Department is currently looking for
a special award to present to each of the boys for their
outstanding effort.

