 

  

  

The task of creating a new museum on the scale of the Power
House is long, difficult and complex. Much of the Museum's
resources have been directed towards this exciting project.
Each year of its development witnesses significant advances,
new issues to resolve and greater confidence in the
project's ultimate success. The year 1985-86 was a crucial
one for the Museum - one of serious appraisal, some change
and a streamlining of practices and organisation.
An important development in 1985-86 has been a restructuring
of the organisation of the Museum to meet the needs of its
developmental projects. This program is now complete and
will remain until the Power House opens. The new structure
has been designed to make the Museum more responsive to the
needs of the project. It temporarily replaces the management
structure of curatorial and production departments. There
are now four divisions, each headed by an Assistant Director
responsible to the Director and Deputy Director. These
divisions are: Exhibitions; Community Services and
Marketing; Properties and Administration; and Space Theatre
and Observatory. These changes have distributed Museum
resources more efficiently, improved interdepartmental
communication, streamlined procedures and upgraded the
status of some activities, such as community services and
marketing. For this financial year, the Annual Report is
structured in line with this new organisation.
During the year the Museum has planned to create a number of
new permanent positions. These positions are for staff who
will be needed to continue Museum work after the Power House
project is complete. Significantly more permanent positions
will need to be created to fulfill the requirements of the
day-to-day running of the Museum from 1988.
In a time of tight budgetary constraint, the Public Service
Board has been reluctant to approve new permanent positions.
The Museum continues its efforts to keep demands on
Government funding to a minimum.
Construction and restoration of the Power House buildings
has progressed well, particularly in the first half of 1986.
Close working relationships have been established between
the Museum and the Public Works Department. This has had
tangible results in the rate of construction. By the end of
the financial year 11,000 cubic metres of concrete had been
poured for the buidings, glazing of the Harris Street
frontage had begun, cleaning the historic brickwork was
proceeding and roofing the new buildings was under way.
In December 1985, the Premier, the Hon Neville Wran,
announced that the Government would build a $11 million
space theatre in the grounds of the Power House. Cutbacks in
expenditure and changes in planning have meant, however,
that Government funding is no longer available for this
project. It is the Museum's view that the location of a
Space Theatre on site would be a major drawcard, increasing
the number of visitors while enhancing the science and
technology areas of the Power House.
The Power House will feature some 30 exhibitions. These have
been grouped into five broad themes: Creativity and
Australian Achievement; Everyday Life in Australia;
Decorative Arts; Bringing People Together; and Science,
Technology and People. The members of these groups are
responsible for the development of the exhibitions;
production departments service them. These include
conservation, registration, photography and community
services, audio visual, publications, production and
administration.
During the year a number of significant reviews were
instituted. These examined the project as a whole,
curatorial areas and individual exhibitions.
At the invitation of the Government, Dame Margaret Weston,
the then Director of the Science Museum, London, inspected
and reported on the Power House project in January 1986.
Dame Margaret approved the direction the project was taking.
However, she made a number of recommendations about what
could be achieved by 1988, where exhibitions would be best
located, and circulation paths within the Museum. Her
recommendations have been accepted by the Museum, and
incorporated into planning and design.
The Museum is reviewing the policies and development
strategies of a number of areas of the Museum's operations.
A committee has reviewed the Decorative Arts; another has
planned for Science and Technology; a third will review
Community Services and Marketing. These committees consist
of senior management within the Museum responsible for the
area being reviewed, and relevant experts and consultants
from tertiary institutions and the community.
The Decorative Arts Review Committee delivered its report in
March 1986. Its proposals have been broadly accepted by the
Trustees and its implementation is subject to proposals from
Museum management.
The Museum continues to examine exhibition storylines,
objects and presentation, among other things, to ensure that
each exhibition is coherent, interesting and accurate. 
During 1985-86 development of Power House exhibitions made
good progress. In early 1986 all reached the design
exhibition phase. Two are being designed in-house. Three are
being designed by consultants: Denton Corker Marshall,
Desmond Freeman and Associates and Neil Burley and
Associates. A Principal Design Consultant, Richard Johnson,
has also been appointed to oversee the design process.
Design drawings have been produced for each display and
detailed design work has begun.
Other specialist consultant services are also being engaged
by the Museum. Emery Vincent and Associates has been
appointed as Graphic Design Consultant, to work on all the
Power House's graphic design from the corporate plan to
signage and labels. Consultants have also been appointed for
lighting, acoustics and quantity surveying. Tenders have
also been received for a Communications Consultant, who will
advise the Museum on written communication with the public
to ensure that displays achieve a dialogue with visitors.
Temporary exhibitions mounted at Museum venues proved
popular with the public (and with critics).
At the Hyde Park Barracks, Settlers and Sydneysiders, an
exhibition of turn-of-the-century photographs, taken by the
Charles Kerry Studio was shown. This exhibition was
sponsored by The Bulletin and drew its images from an
extensive collection of glass-plate negatives taken by the
studio, donated to the Museum by Australian Consolidated
Press.
In the Australian fauna room at The Mint, there was a
display, Picture the Kangaroo, of children's books and
illustrations on the theme of the kangaroo.
At Sydney Observatory, in the newly restored west wing, a
temporary exhibition on Halley's comet was mounted between
December 1985 and April 1986. Forty seven thousand people
visited this exhibition. A new exhibition previewing the
Power House project was mounted in Stage I.
New temporary exhibitions of German Crafts, the Wellcome
collection from the Science Museum in London, and koalas in
children's books and illustrations, are planned for The Mint
and Hyde Park Barracks in the second half of 1986.
Exhibitions on contemporary Swedish design, and Rhoda Wager
and her school, will be mounted early in 1987.
The Museum was honoured in April 1986 by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers. This group made the Boulton
and Watt Rotative Beam Engine an International Landmark, an
award conferred on only half a dozen objects outside the
USA. The award is made for engineering artefacts of social
or historical importance. The Boulton and Watt was the third
rotative beam engine built, and it is the oldest to survive.
The Museum celebrated the engine's 200th birthday in July
1985.
Major acquisitions this year included the Tooth and Company
Limited Collection, a comprehensive collection of some 7,000
items relating to the history of brewing in New South Wales;
the Findlayson Collection of tin toys purchased with Patrons
Funds; the first official air ambulance; a Fairlight
computer musical instrument; a spectroscope; chairs made by
Sebel Australia and a bronze candleholder by Sir Bertram
Mackennal. These artefacts have been collected for display
in exhibitions in the Power House Museum.
It is, however, staff who make the Museum function; and on
them the Power House project depends. Their dedication and
hard work are invaluable.
All at the Museum look forward confidently to the future.
The new organisational structure and the processes of review
are providing the Museum with clear and far-sighted
policies, objectives and strategies, better management,
exhibitions and public services. Over the past year the
Museum's record has been very creditable. Several popular
temporary exhibitions have been held. Excellent acquisitions
have been made, and development of the Power House has
advanced considerably.
I am confident this progress will continue in the coming
year, extending the Museum's capacity to entertain,
enlighten and enthral. The standards the Museum has set will
be upheld, and at Sydney Observatory and the Power House we
will establish significant Museums of which New South Wales
can be very proud.


         DIVISION OF COMMUNITY SERVICES AND MARKETING  

The appointment of an Assistant Director, Community Services
and Marketing in May 1986 brought together four previously
separate departments: Community Services, Publications,
Museum Shops and the Library. This consolidation places
community services and marketing functions firmly within the
senior management structure of the Museum, a positive step
towards ensuring the quality of visitor interaction with the
Museum's exhibitions.
The overall objectives of the Division are to ensure that
communication with visitors through exhibitions and related
programs is maximised and that their experience is
comfortable and enjoyable. The Division is committed to the
view that the Power House Museum's success lies in
delivering a lively, involving experience that will
encourage occasional visitors to return to the Museum
frequently. The establishment of a Division with this aim is
a first step in that direction.
The activities of the four departments are detailed below.
The new Division also has a group of Education Officers
responsible for Community Services input to the Power House
project. With barely 20 months to opening, the Division will
be concentrating on developing visitor programs,
publications and products related to the collections.
Consolidation of services provided to visitors at the
Museum's other venues will also take place.

 Community Services Department  

The purpose of this Department is to assist and encourage
people to make use of the Museum and in the process to raise
its profile in a positive sense in the community. To this
end we offer a comprehensive range of services and programs
designed to make optimum use of the Museum's resources in a
manner consistent with audience needs and Museum policy.

 Stage I  

Stage I was closed from September 1985 to late January 1986
to allow the removal of a large part of the previous
exhibition and the establishment of a new one. The closure
released a number of staff which provided an opportunity to
develop a series of talks about the Museum, its collections
and future development for schools and senior citizen
groups.

 The Mint and Hyde Park Barracks  

Regular, general and special tours were run for schools,
colleges, clubs, tourists and casual visitors by both paid
and voluntary guides. Two `community language' volunteer
guides were recruited to provide tours for visitors from
cultural minority groups. A number of new activity sheets
and teacher information leaflets were developed for formal
school programs. These were complemented by school holiday
programs including films, craft and recreational activities.
A ten-session Adult Education Course was developed in
conjunction with the Workers' Educational Association.
Events such as Heritage Week and Senior Citizens' Week were
marked by specially tailored programs.
Over the next twelve months community services at The Mint
and Barracks will be expanded, particularly in the area of
exhibition-related information for use by schools.

 Sydney Observatory  

Special brochures on Halley's Comet were produced for
visitors, including a Japanese language leaflet. From early
February the night viewing sessions for the public were
extended from four nights to six. From July 1986 these will
be increased again from one to two sessions per night. The
evening visits are very popular with bookings usually
required about six weeks ahead.
A broader public education program, including in-service
teacher seminars and practical workshops is being developed
for the fully-restored Observatory.

 Museum on the Move  

During the year Museum on the Move undertook two tours, one
to the Northern Rivers area, and one to the Riverina. 54,000
people saw the exhibition which deals with social change.
During September 1985 the train went to Wentworthville in
Sydney's west, and over a period of six days 6,000 people
visited the exhibition.
An education officer took up duties at the end of the year
to develop a new exhibition for Museum on the Move in 1988.

