Major advance in genetic engineering techniques  

CSIRO and Sydney University scientists have made a major advance towards
the development of genetically engineered vaccines for a wide range of human
and animal diseases.
  The scientists are using the new techniques to develop a vaccine against
footrot, a major disease of sheep now costing Australian farmers about $60M
a year in losses and control measures. Footrot is a problem in many countries
including the US, New Zealand and the Soviet Union.
  The researchers believe the techniques, patented world-wide, could also
form the basis for vaccines against other diseases including gonorrhea
and conjuctivitis.
  Minister for Science Barry Jones announced the vaccine development during
a visit to the CSIRO Division of Molecular Biology in Sydney.
  Mr Jones also announced an agreement between CSIRO, Sydney University
and two Australian companies, Biotechnology Australia and Arthur Webster,
to produce the footrot vaccine.
  The agreement, negotiated by CSIRO's commercial company, Sirotech, involves
a two-year collaborative research program aimed at the commercial
development of the vaccine against footrot.
  Mr Jones said a prototype footrot vaccine had been successfully produced
and tested by scientists from CSIRO's Divisions of Molecular Biology in
Sydney, Animal Health and Protein Chemistry in Melbourne and the University
of Sydney.
  "This research agreement includes further refinement of the prototype
and the vaccine is expected to be on the market within two years," he said.
  "Currently available footrot vaccines are very expensive to produce because
the footrot bacterium is slow growing, requires a particular environment
and oxygen-free conditions. These vaccines also contain at least eight
different strains of the bacterium and this adds to the production problems.
  In developing the genetically engineered vaccine, the scientists used
recombinant DNA methods to transfer a key gene from the footrot bacterium
into a less fastidious, fast growing bacterium.
  This gene controls the development of small hairs, known as fimbriae,
which are used by the bacteria to attach to animal or human tissue.
  The proteins that make up these hairs act as antigens, triggering the
defence system of the infected animal. Isolating these antigens is crucial
in the development of effective vaccines.
  A wide range of other bacteria used similar hairs to colonise host tissue
and the same techniques may be used to develop a vaccine against them.
  The researches are: Prof John Egerton, professor of Veterinary Clinical
Studies at Sydney University, who first established that it was feasible
to vaccinate sheep against footrot; Dr David Stewart of CSIRO's Division
of Animal Health, who first discovered that bacterial fimbriae were the
key antigens required for vaccination; Dr Neil McKern of CSIRO's Division
of Protein Chemistry, who determined the amino acid sequence of the fimbrial
protein; Dr John Mattick of CSIRO's Division of Molecular Biology, Dr Tom
Elleman of CSIRO's Division of Protein Chemistry, and Ms Beau Anderson,
a CSIRO/Sydney University student, who collectively performed all the genetic
engineering associated with the project.
  "Trials have shown the vaccine to be extremely effective and it is expected
to be relatively inexpensive to produce," Mr Jones said. 
  "Under the agreement, the two companies will provide technologists and
financial support for commercial development and will jointly hold an exclusive
world-wide licence to produce and market a successful product.
  "If all goes as expected, this Australian high technology product will
find a ready world market. The research has been supported in part by the
Australian Wool Corporation and the Australian Meat and Livestock Research
and Development Corporation.
  "High hopes are held for genetically engineered vaccines and this is one
of the first to reach this advanced stage. And in the longer term the
techniques learnt here are expected to have much wider application.
  "This work represents a most important advance in vaccine technology and
confirms Australia's leading position in genetic engineering research.
  "Furthermore, we have made great strides in recent years to ensure
Australian industry benefits from this growing scientific expertise."

 Hope ahead for osteo-arthritis sufferers  

Scientific collaborators in Sydney and Sweden believe they are well on the
way to developing a new class of drugs which would revolutionise the treatment
of osteo-arthritis, one of the most common diseases of old age, as well
as a range of other degenerative diseases of connective tissue. The drugs
could also aid the healing process after cartilage injuries.
  It is envisaged the treatment would also have wide application to
domesticated animals, especially racehorses. In man and animals the principal
weight bearing joints, the knee and hip, as well as the spine, are the
areas most affected by osteo-arthritis.
  A grant of $50,000 plus $17,000 for equipment towards this year's research
in Sydney has come from the Swedish pharmaceutical company Pharmacia with
more anticipated in the future.
  Dr Peter Ghosh, director of the Raymond Purves Laboratory at Royal North
Shore Hospital (RNSH) and a member of the Department of Surgery (Orthopaedic
and Traumatic), leads the Sydney team. A senior research biochemist with
Pharmacia at Upsala, Sweden, Dr Tony de Belder, will work at RNSH with Dr
Ghosh on the project until September. Dr Ghosh believes the grant may be
one of the first made in conjunction with the university which comes under
the new 150% tax concession category.

 Millions suffer  

  Osteo-arthritis causes suffering to millions throughout the world. Latest
figures show that about 86% of women and 78% of men over the age of 65 suffer
from it in some form. Other degenerative conditions are common, particularly
injuries to the knee, hip and spine which frequently lead to pain and
incapacity. 
  The only drugs presently available in Australia to treat these conditions
are limited to those suppressing symptoms by alleviating pain, swelling
and the influx of inflammatory cells and their mediators: but they have
no ability to stimulate healing to aid the underlying problem. Among drugs
commonly used are aspirin, naprosyn and indocid and, in severe cases, cortosin.
  The new drugs, Dr Ghosh anticipates, would modify degeneration of joint
articular cartilage by suppressing enzymes and other mediators which, in
the pathological state "eat" the connective tissue or cartilage faster
than the tissue cell can replace it.
  "In healthy cartilage enzyme inhibitors are present which normally block
these degradative processes," said Dr Ghosh, "but for some reason the levels
of these natural inhibitors is depressed in arthritis."
  Dr Ghosh and his team have isolated and purified, for the first time,
the natural inhibitors which suppress the destructive enzymes and they consider
that future therapy in this area may be based on replacing the inhibitors
lost from arthritic cartilage.
  Now that the native inhibitors have been characterised, DNA recombitant
techniques should allow them to be produced synthetically.
  A semi-synthetic molecule available in Europe and Japan, Arteparon, which
has a similar mechanism of action to the drugs currently under study, gives
cause for optimism in the drug project underway. Arteparon is not a pure
compound, however, but is an ill-defined mixture prepared by chemical
modicication of calf cartilage extract.
  As it is difficult to define its structure, according to Dr Ghosh,
registration in Australia for human use has not been achieved. Nevertheless,
clinical trials with Arteparon in Germany undertaken since 1976 on more
than 5000 osteo-arthritic patients have shown a high degree of success.

 Excellent results  

  Of the 80% who experienced good results from the drug about 20% had excellent
results, some with remission. Of the 20% who received no benefits from
Arteparon, less than 1% experienced side-effects, the main one being related
to anti-coagulant activity when the drug was injected directly into the joint.
  Dr Ghosh and colleagues consider the molecules they have so far developed
are superior to Arteparon. Moreover, they can be well-defined structurally.
  By correlating the biological activity of these new drugs with their
structure and conformation they are confident that new highly specific
anti-arthritic agents will emerge.

 NH&MRC grants  

  Dr Ghosh has also received substantial grants from NH&MRC for several
years for basic research on cartilage, its structure, function and metabolism.
This work provided the key to a better understanding of the connective tissues
which are found in knee joint minisci, articular cartilage, ligaments,
tendons and intervetebral discs. Their work has concentrated on articular
cartilage of the hip and knee, fibro-cartilage, or the miniscus, of the
knee joint, and intervertebral discs.
  In these areas, Dr Ghosh explained, there are classes of enzymes,
metallo-proteinases and serine proteinases, which in abnormal conditions
degrade some of the principle matrix, or building blocks, of the connective
tissue. Normally these enzymes are latent but they can be triggered by
inflammatory mediators during injury or because of nutritional inadequacies
of the connective tissue cells.
  "Mature connective tissues are avascular, that is, they do not have their
own blood supply," said Dr Ghosh. "Normally building blocks or nutrients
such as oxygen, glucose, amino-acids and phosphates must traverse up to
three millimetres of tissue to get to the cartilage cells, or chondocytes.
This renders them particularly susceptible to events which interfere with
their nutrition.
  "In the case of the disc, injury, inflammation, or an inherited abnormality
in the bone plate beneath the disc, can dramatically influence the nutritional
process, often leading to cell death.
  "In response some of the cells then produce more lactic acid which makes
their environment more acid stimulating enzyme activity.
  "It was while investigating the activity of these enzymes and the ways
in which they could be controlled that the discovery was made about the
presence in human articular cartilage and discs of inhibitors which prevent
the enzymes from degrading the fundamental building blocks."
  In the course of his work Dr Ghosh and his colleagues have investigated
21 drugs and their effects on the cartilage. He has found that some used
to reduce inflammation and swelling, do not help the articular cartilage
itself and sometimes make it worse by suppressing the body's natural repair
mechanisms.

 Koalas threatened by lack of research  

  Ignorance is the biggest problem facing Australia's koala population -
ignorance of their health problems, their mortality rate and how they are
adapting to a changing environment through contact with human beings.
  "I expect their numbers are declining, but nobody knows for sure," says
Dr Paul Canfield, senior lecturer in the Department of Veterinary Pathology
at the University of Sydney and one of the few academics in Australia actively
involved in koala research.
  Supported by $5080 from the Sun Herald Koala Appeal Fund and $7500 from
the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service, Dr Canfield is attempting
to discover what diseases koalas are susceptible to, and what causes them.
His work involves 40 to 50 post mortems on koalas each year.
  "We know so little about koalas we are not even sure what their normal
metabolism is," Dr Canfield says. "One of my tasks is to try
to establish normal haematological and biological parameters in order to
detect abnormalities."

 "Wet backside"  

  Urogenital and respiratory diseases are common findings in koalas examined
by Dr Canfield. The urogenital disease is also known as "wet backside" disease
and probably affects the fertility of infected koalas, throwing additional
stress on population rates. Koalas also suffer from cancers and diseases
of the gastrointestinal tract and liver, according to Dr Canfield's research.
  Dr Canfield has been conducting research into koalas for more than six
years, and in that time has performed post mortems on about 130 of the animals.
  The dead koalas are sent to him by the Port Macquarie Koala Preservation
Society and by vets from the NSW North Coast and other areas. The Society
also takes blood for testing from both sick and apparently healthy koalas
so a fuller picture of the state of disease in koala populations can be
formed.
  "A large percentage of the deaths of koalas are directly or indirectly
related to car accidents or from maulings by wild animals and domestic pets,"
Dr Canfield said.
  "But in about 20% of cases we can't find any tissue damage so we don't
know the cause of death. We just don't have the adequate information so
it is impossible to reach a diagnosis."

 Varying success  

  Treatment of sick koalas is also in the infancy stage.

