Antifertility activity and toxicity of α-chlorohydrin aromatic ketal
analogues in male rats  By P.D.C. Brown-Woodman, I.G. White and D.D. Ridley Abstract  
The antifertility activity and toxicity of ?-chlorohydrin and seven
aromatic ketal derivatives were investigated in male rats.  At a dose of
5 mg/kg injected intraperitioneally each day for 14 days, ?-chlorohydrin
and the methoxy benzaldehyde derivative (compound 2) produced complete
infertility.  The benzaldehyde derivative (compound 1) was 89% effective
and the other five compounds 71-25% effective.  All compounds except the
least effective antifertility agent, the methylbenzaldehyde derivative
(compound 3), reduced the motility of sperm recovered from the epididymis.
None of the compounds caused a decrease in body or testes weight but some
increased adrenal weight. 

 Introduction  

  Since ?-chlorohydrin possesses many desirable properties as a male
contraceptive, but has proved too toxic for human use, numerous studies
have been undertaken in an attempt to find analogues which exhibit
antifertility activity without the side-effects (Jones 1983).


                           

  The structural requirements for antifertility activity are very specific,
and thus the number of possible modifications limited.  The active compound
must contain three saturated carbon atoms: a primary carbon atom bearing
a chlorine atom, adjacent to a carbon atom bearing a secondary hydroxyl
group, adjacent to a primary carbon atom bearing a primary hydroxyl group.
The hydroxyl groups may be free, esterified or present as ether linkages
(Fig. 1) (cf. Jones 1978).
  Brown-Woodman et al. (1979) found that compound 1 (Fig. 1c) was an
effective antifertility agent in the male rat and apparently less toxic
than ?-chlorohydrin.  In view of this we have synthesized ketal 
derivatives of ?-chlorohydrin and tested their antifertility 
activity in male rats.

 Materials and Methods Treatment of Rats  

  Mature fertile Wistar rats were maintained under regulated conditions
of temperature, light and humidity, and were given food and water ad lib.
  The formulae of ?-chlorohydrin and the analogues tested are shown Fig. 1.  Each compound was dissolved in propyleneglycol and five male
rats were injected subcutaneously daily for 15 days with each analogue,
at a dose equivalent to 5 mg ?-chlorohydrin per kilogram body weight.
A control group of rats received propyleneglycol alone.  Two female rats
were caged with each male on the seventh day of injection.  Male rats were
killed and weighed on day 16 and the testes, epididymides, spleen, adrenal
and body weights recorded.  The vasa defentia were flushed with 0.5 ml
Krebs-Ringer phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) containing 0.3% (w/v) fructose, and
the 0.5-ml portions from each rat were pooled.  Aliquots (0.2 ml) were added
to 1.0 formal saline for assessment of sperm concentration using a
haemocytometer.  Sperm motility was scored on the remainder according to
the method of Emmens (1947).  The female rats were killed 20 days after
mating and checked for pregnancy and the litter size recorded.

 Preparation of Ketal Derivatives of  ?-Chlorohydrin   

  The ketal derivatives of ?-cholorohydrin were prepared from
?-chlorohydrin (0.10) mol), the carbonyl compound (0.11 mol), and
p-toluenesulfonic acid (0.005 mol) in benzene (200 ml).  The mixture was
refluxed for 24 h (Dean-Stark water separator being used to remove water
formed in the reaction), cooled, and extracted with dilute Na2CO3. After 
evaporation of the dried solvent the residue was distilled under reduced
pressure.
  Thus were prepared the benzaldehyde derivative (compound 1), b.p.
103°C/1.2mm
(Baggett et al. 1966); (126-127°/4 mm); the p-methoxybenzaldehyde
derivative (compound 2), b.p. 128-130°/0.2mm (found: C, 57.8; H, 
5.4; Cl, 15.6. CH13ClO13 requires C, 57.8; H, 5.7; Cl, 15.5%); the
p-methylbenzaldehyde derivative (compound 3), b.p. 100-104°/0.04 mm
(found: C, 62.3; H, 6.3; Cl, 16.9.  C11H13ClO2 requires C, 62.1; H, 6.2; 
Cl,16.7%); the p-chlorobenzaldehyde derivative (compound 4), b.p.
106°/0.15 mm (found C, 51.2; H, 4.6; Cl, 30.8.  C10H10Cl2O2
requires C, 51.5; H, 4.6; Cl, 30.4%); the p-nitrobenzaldehyde derivative
(compound 5), m.p. 55-61° (found: C, 49.2; H, 4.5; Cl, 14.3.
C10H10ClNO4 requires C, 49.3; H, 4.4; Cl, 14.6%); the acetophenone derivative 
(compound 6), b.p. 84-86°/0.4 mm (found C, 61.9; H, 6.4; Cl, 16.7.  
C11H13ClO2 requires, C, 62.1; H, 6.2; Cl, 16.7%; the cinnamaldehyde derivative 
(compound 7), b.p. 140-142°/0.6 mm (found C, 62.1; H, 6.2; Cl, 16.9.  
C11H13ClO2 requires C, 62.1; H, 6.2; Cl, 16.7%). All compounds tested were 
racemic and all of the derivatives of ?-chlorohydrin were additionally 
mixtures of diastereoisomers which could not be separated.

 Statistical analysis  

  The significance of differences between treatments was examined by analysis
of variance and Duncan's multiple-range test (Steel and Torrie 1960).  The
mean increase in body weight during the experiment for each of the analogues
was compared with the controls by a paired t-test.  The number of fetuses
produced per rat was analysed by a Student's t-test.

 Results  

  ?-Chlorohydrin and all analogues decreased the fertility of the male
rats to some extent.  Of the analogues, compounds 1 and 2 were the most
active (Table 1), and the latter, like ?-chlorohydrin, was completely
effective.  Both the number of pregnancies and the number of fetuses per
litter were less than in the control group, except for compound 3 which
did not decrease the litter size.  All compounds except compound 3 reduced
motility of the epididymal sperm (Table 2).  None of the compounds caused
an increase in the separation of sperm heads and tails (Table 2).
 

                              

  
  No significant change in body weight occurred during the 15 days of
injections.  ?-Chlorohydrin produced a significant decrease in testicular
weight compared with the control; however, none of the derivatives affected
testicular weight (Table 3).  Spleen weight was decreased in all groups
except those which received compounds 1 and 3, while adrenal gland weight
was unchanged in all rats except those which received compound 7, where
an increase was noted (Table 3).
   
                              


 Discussion  

  These experiments confirm that it is possible to mask the hydroxyl groups
of  ?-chlorohydrin with ketal groups and still maintain at least a degree
of antifertility activity.  ?-Chlorohydrin itself was completely effective
and did not increase adrenal weight at the low dose in this experiment,
in contrast to the increase following a single injection of 90 mg/kg (Brown-
Woodman and White 1975).

                              

  The benzaldehyde derivative (compound 1) was again found to be highly
effective (89%) in reducing the fertility of male rats although it did not
completely abolish fertility as was the case in the previous trial
(Brown-Woodman et al. 1979).  As there was again no increase in adrenal
weight, no loss of body weight, and no change in spleen weight, the compound
is possibly non-toxic.  Stress or injection of toxic substance are known
to cause enlargement of the adrenals and atrophy of the spleen (Selye 1976).
  Substitution of a methoxy (-OCH3) group in the para position of the
benzene ring of compound 1 apparently increased antifertility activity as
compound 2 was 100% effective, but only six of the 10 rats mated.  This may
reflect reduced libido or some degree of toxicity, as although body and
adrenal weights were not affected by the compound, spleen weight was
significantly decreased.  Addition of a methyl group to the benzene ring
(compound 3) greatly reduced antifertility activity and the harmful effect
on epididymal sperm motility.  The compound was also apparently less toxic
than the methoxy derivative (compound 2) since there was no increase in
adrenal weight, and no change in spleen weight.  Substitution with chloro
(compound 4) and nitro (compound 5) groups in the benzene ring did not reduce
antifertility activity nearly as much as methyl group substitution; compound
5, however, may be toxic as the weight of the spleen was decreased.
Substitution of a methyl group in the carbon link (compound 6) of the ketal
group or lengthening the carbon link (compound 7) also reduced antifertility
activity and presumably increased toxicity as judged by the decreased spleen
weights observed in the rats receiving both compounds, and the increased
adrenal weight seen with compound 7.
  We had hoped that increasing the lipophilic nature of the ?-
chlorohydrin derivatives might have enhanced uptake by the epididymis and 
this, followed by slow release into the blood stream, would reduce the 
toxicity of the compounds compared to ?-chlorohydrin, without 
impairing antifertility activity.  However, this does not appear to be 
the case.
  It is not known whether these ketal derivatives exert their antifertility
activity as such or after degradation to ?-chlorohydrin, although the
decrease in activity observed in the series reflects expected ease of
hydrolysis to the starting carbonyl compounds and ?-chlorohydrin and
we believe that ?-chlorohydrin is the active compound.  Some support
for this was obtained by in situ experiments.  Thus the ketals were
heated at 37°C at pH 7.4 (KH2PO4-Na2HPO4 buffer) and
the mixtures were analysed by g.l.c. for the presence of the free carbonyl
component and ?-chlorohydrin.  Compound 2 was 5% hydrolysed after 24h,
compound 1 was 1% hydrolysed after 24 h, whilst no hydrolysis products were
observed under these conditions for compounds 3-7.  The fact that these
compounds were relatively inert under these near-physiological conditions
is not surprising since ketal hydrolyses generally become rapid around 
pH 3; on the other hand their resistance to hydrolysis at pH 7.4 in situ
does not necessarily indicate resistance to hydrolysis in vivo where
enzymatic catalysis may occur.
  Jones and O'Brien (1980) studied the metabolism by the rat of two ketal
derivatives which had been shown previously to have antifertility activities
in the rat comparable to that of ?-chlorohydrin (Banik et al. 1972;
Hirsch et al. 1975).  Both compounds produce ?-chlorolactate, the
major oxidative metabolite of ?-chlorohydrin, indicating that these 
ketal derivatives are degraded to ?-chlorohydrin.  The antifertility 
effectiveness of the compounds tested in the present experiment may therefore, 
reflect their ease of degradation to ?-chlorohydrin.
  The reduction in epididymal sperm motility produced by ?-chlorohydrin
and all the analogues apart from compound 3 was not unexpected in view of
the data that the primary effect of ?-chlorohydrin is directed towards
the sperm in the epididymis and it produces biochemical changes in the organ
(Crabo and Appelgren 1972; Brown-Woodman and White, 1975, 1976; Lobl 1980;
Tsang et al. 1981; Paz and Homonnai 1982).  Low doses of ?-chlorohydrin
do not affect the weight or ultrastructure of the epididymis (Reijonen et
al. 1975) and thus the fact that none of the derivatives produced change
in epididymal weight was not surprising.  Compounds 1 and 2 would seem to
warrant further investigation as possible male antifertility agents.

 Acknowledgements  
The authors wish to thank Miss H. Hughes for her invaluable technical
assistance.

