<sample>
	<id> J09 </id>
	


	<note> 2006 words </note>
	


	<source> Australian Journal of Zoology </source>
	


	<h> Phylogenetic relationships in the genus Limnodynastes (anura:myobatrachidae): 
a molecular perspective </h>
	


	<bl> J.D. Roberts and Linda R. Maxson </bl>
	


	<h> Abstract </h>
	

Phylogenetic relationships among 10 of the 12 currently recognised species
of Limnodynastes were investigated by the quantitative immunological
technique of micro-complement fixation (MC'F).  Analyses of albumin
differentiation in Limnodynastes suggest that L. ornatus and L. spenceri
are representatives of an independent lineage that emerged in the early
Tertiary.  We identify four additional lineages appearing in the early
Oligocene (L. terraereginae, L. dumerili, L. dorsalis and probably
L. interioris; L. tasmaniensis, L. fletcheri and L. peroni; L. salmini;
and L. convexiusculus).  Our data do not support the recognition of
Platyplectron (Heyer &amp; Liem, 1976) as a separate genus. Members of 
Platyplectron are more closely related to various groupings within 
Limnodynastes than they are to other burrowing genera (Heleioporus, 
Notaden and Neobatrachus).
  Analyses of geographically widespread populations of L. ornatus,
L. tasmaniensis, L. peroni and of the subspecies of L. dumerili indicate
degrees of genetic differentiation which are correlated with distance.



	<h> Introduction </h>
	

  Frogs of the genus Limnodynastes are widespread over the Australian
continent with one species also found in southern New Guinea (Tyler et
al. 1981).  All species in the genus construct floating foam nests for
egg deposition and these are often a conspicuous feature of amphibian breeding
sites in Australia (e.g. illustrated in Moore 1961).  There are both
non-burrowing and burrowing forms of Limnodynastes, with two of the latter
occurring in the central deserts (L. ornatus and L. spenceri: Tyler et
al. 1981).
  Martin (1972), Littlejohn and Roberts (1975), Heyer and Liem (1976), Tyler
(1976), Tyler et al. (1979), Farris et al. (1982) and Watson and
Littlejohn (1985) have all recently dealt with systematic, evolutionary,
or biogeographic questions within this genus.  However, the conclusions
drawn in these papers need to be treated cautiously for two reasons.
  First, recent biochemical work on Australian anurans (summarised in Roberts
and Maxson 1985b) has questioned relationships and speciation patterns amongst
Australian frogs which have been inferred from similarities in external
morphology, call structure, and the results of artificial hybridisation
tests.  These latter types of data were used by Martin (1972), Littlejohn
and Roberts (1975) and Watson and Littlejohn (1985) to infer speciation
patterns amongst members of the L. dorsalis group and the L. tasmaniensis
complex.  Evaluation by an independent molecular technique seems desirable.
Second, detailed analyses of the same morphological and ecological data
from Australian myobatrachid frogs (including species of Limnodynastes)
by Heyer and Liem (1976) and Farris et al. (1982) have reached differing
conclusions.  Farris et al. noted that the data they used have given
equivocal information on relationships.  Thus, it appeared that an independent,
molecular data set could be helpful in addressing questions of phylogeny
in these taxa.
  This paper probes phylogenetic relationships among species of
Limnodynastes, using micro-complement fixation (MC'F) studies of albumin
evolution.  MC'F and the resultant immunological distance (ID) data have
been widely used in phylogenetic analysis (e.g. amphibians, Maxson 1984;
reptiles, Gorman et al. 1971; mammals, Collier and O'Brien 1985; birds,
Prager and Wilson 1980; insects, Beverley and Wilson 1982; and bacteria,
Champion et al. 1980).  Moreover, because albumin evolves at a relatively
constant rate (e.g. Maxson and Wilson 1975; Wilson et al. 1977; Thorpe
1982), studies of albumin evolution can also provide a temporal perspective
on the evolutionary process.
  We address four interrelated questions on systematic relationships and
speciation in Limnodynastes arising from the recent literature cited above.
  (1) Is any generic division of Limnodynastes supported by immunological
data?  This question stems from Heyer and Liem's (1976) use of the name
Platyplectron to accommodate members of the L. dorsalis group (L. dorsalis,
L. dumerili, L. interioris and L. terraereginae: Martin 1972) and the
L. ornatus group (L. ornatus and L. spenceri: Tyler et al. 1979),
and from the suggestion by Tyler et al. (1979) that each of the three
distinct morphological groups they recognised within Limnodynastes (sensu
lato), the `dorsalis' group, the `ornatus' group and the `tasmaniensis'
group (L. tasmaniensis, L. peroni, L. fletcheri, L. salmini and
L. convexiusculus), might warrant elevation to generic status.
  (2) If a division of Limnodynastes is justified, where do the affinities
of the resulting groups lie?  Heyer and Liem (1976) described Limnodynastes
and Platyplectron as sister groups but in a re-analysis of the same data set,
Farris et. al. (1982) showed Platyplectron to be more closely associated with 
other burrowing genera of the subfamily Limnodynastinae such as Heleioporus,
Neobatrachus and Notaden.
  (3) Do the immunological data suggest that descriptions of new species
or erection of any new synonymies are warranted?  These actions might be
justified in taxa that have dubious status as separate species,
e.g. L. spenceri, or in the subspecific taxa recognized in `L. dorsalis
(Martin 1972) or in the call races of the L. tasmaniensis complex (Littlejohn
and Roberts 1975; Roberts 1976).  For example, L. spenceri was described
by Parker (1940), but Moore (1961) and Barker and Grigg (1977) have questioned
whether this species is distinct from L. ornatus.
  (4)  Are the call races of the L. tasmaniensis complex and the subspecies
of L. dorsalis of Pleistocene age or, are they older?  These subspecies
and call races have been viewed as evolving in the Pleistocene (Littlejohn
and Roberts 1975; Roberts 1976; Martin 1972).  However, recent papers by
Barendse (1984), Maxson and Roberts (1984) and Roberts and Maxson (1985a, 1985b)
have questioned Pleistocene scenarios for speciation events in other components
of the southern and south-western Australian anuran fauna.
  By means of MC'F studies of albumin evolution we have been able to provide
answers to all four questions that we have posed.


	<h> Materials and Methods </h>
	

  Albumins from 14 species of Australian frogs were studied: Limnodynastes
convexiusculus L. dorsalis, L. dumerili (six populations), L. fletcheri,
L. ornatus (five populations), L. peroni (four populations), L. salmini,
L. spenceri (two populations), L. tasmaniensis (11 populations),
L. terraereginae, Heleioporus barycragus, H. australiacus, Notaden
nichollsi and Neobatrachus pictus.  Unless otherwise indicated, single
specimens were used as representatives of each population or species.  Earlier
work has shown intrapopulation variation for a valid species is within the
sensitivity of the MC'F assay, ?2 immunological distance units (Maxson
and Maxson 1979).
  Serum albumin was purified from plasma by single-step polyacrylamide-gel
electrophoresis (Maxson et al. 1979).  A single frog of each species
provided plasma for L. dorsalis, L. dumerili, L. ornatus, L. salmini,
H. barycragus, H. australiacus and No. nichollsi.  Plasma was pooled
from three L. peroni and from seven L. tasmaniensis.  Purified albumins
were used for production of antisera in rabbits.  Antisera were tested for
purity as described by Maxson et al. (1982).  MC'F experiments were
performed with antisera to the albumins of six species of Limnodynastes,
the two species of Heleioporus, and No. nichollsi following procedures
outlined in Champion et al. (1974).  The six Limodynastes species
were selected as representative of the described species-groups.  Sufficient
material was not available to prepare a complete set of antisera.
  Data are reported as immunological distance (ID) where one ID unit is
roughly equivalent to one amino acid difference between the albumins compared
(Maxson and Wilson 1974).  The phylogenetic tree was constructed from the
averages of reciprocal comparisons by a simple algorithm (Maxson et al.
1979) which is a modification of Farris' Wagner tree method (Farris 1972).
This method is appropriate for albumin MC'F data where the large number
of amino acid positions in albumin permits one to assume there are very
few parallel- and back-mutation contaminations.  For species where only
one-way comparisons were available, species were added to the tree by the
method outlined in Beverley and Wilson (1982).  Estimates of divergence
dates are based on the relationship between ID and time, described by Maxson
and Wilson (1975), where 100 units of ID accumulate between two independent
lineages every 55-60 million years.
  Voucher specimens were deposited in the South Australian Museum, Adelaide
(SAM) and Western Australian Museum, Perth (WAM).  The individual frogs
are indicated by LRM collection number in parentheses and collection locality.
Standard abbreviations are used for Australian States and Territories, and
points of the compass.

                           
	<note> LIST </note>
	

  Specimens used to prepare antisera are indicated by an asterisk.  Multiple
museum registration numbers indicate plasma was pooled from several frogs.
Otherwise, samples are from a single frog except where indicated for species
with no museum registration number.


	<h> Results </h>
	

  The average titre and slope of the nine antisera used in this study were
5100 and 375 respectively, values typical of earlier studies of albumin
evolution in anurans (Maxson 1981).  Table 1 presents the data from reciprocal
comparisons among the six species of Limnodynastes

                           
	<note> TABLE </note>
	

for which we have antisera, as well as the data from one-way comparisons
with each of the antisera for four additional species.  Reciprocal tests
indicate how well the albumin sequence differences between species are
estimated.  Our reciprocal data demonstrate a significant non-randomness
which was corrected by methods outlined by Sarich and Cronin (1976).  The
standard deviation (Maxson and Wilson 1975) of the raw data is 17.6% and
for the `corrected' reciprocal matrix (Table 2) is 12.4%.  In general, standard
deviations for comparable matrices vary from 10 to 20% (Maxson et al. 1982).
The averages for the `corrected' reciprocal measurements (Table 2) were
used to construct a phylogeny for Limnodynastes (Fig.1).  In order to
estimate how well the tree of the six species (Table 2) describes the input
data, we calculated the percentage standard deviation between the data input
and the tree output (Fitch and Margoliash 1967).  This value, 9.4%, is
comparable to values from other studies (Maxson et al. 1982).  The
percentage error (Prager and Wilson 1976) is 6.7%.

                          
	<note> FIGURE </note>
	

  Four species of Limnodynastes to which we did not have antisera have
been added to the tree in Fig.1.  The locations of these species were
determined from their respective reactions to each of the antisera (Table
1).  Table 3 contains data on albumin variation in different populations
of four species of Limnodynastes.  These are all one-way comparisons with
the available, relevant antiserum.  Table 4 contains data comparing
representative major Limnodynastes lineages defined by this study with
other, possibly related, genera (Farris et al. 1982).  All data, except
those involving Ne. pictus, are reciprocal comparisons.  The standard
deviation of the reciprocal matrix in Table 4 is 11.9%.  If the single pair
L. ornatus-L. dumerili is omitted, the standard deviation from reciprocity
drops by almost half to 6.5%.  Such deviation from reciprocity, as is exhibited
by this single comparison, is not typical, but illustrates why we use averages
of reciprocal measurements to estimate phylogenies.  Without absolute albumin
sequences, or data from a second molecule, we have no way of determining
which value, 57 or 130, is the more accurate estimate of the `true' albumin
sequence difference between these species.  However, in this instance our
phylogenetic conclusions are unaffected because all other reciprocal
comparisons with L. ornatus determine the phylogenetic position of this
lineage as most distant from all other Limnodynastes, except L. spenceri.
The averages of reciprocal comparisons in Table 4 were used to add
Heleioporus and Notaden to the phylogeny in Fig.1.  When input and output
data for L. ornatus, L. salmini, L.dumerili, H. australiacus, H. barycragus and
No. nichollsi (Table 4) are compared, the standard deviation is 5.9%. 
The percentage error is 5.4%.  These parameters suggest the tree is a good
representation of the branching relationships among the taxa studied.
Ne. pictus was not included in Fig. 1 because its relationships appear to
be to Heleioporus (Table 4), not to Limnodynastes, and an antiserum
will be needed to definitely associate Neobatrachus with other limnodynastine
genera.

                             
	<note> TABLE </note>
	


	<h> Discussion </h>
	


	<h> Age of Limnodynastes </h>
	

  There are clearly some old divisions within this genus.  By means of the
molecular clock properties of albumin evolution (Maxson and Wilson 1975;
Wilson et al. 1977; Carlson et al. 1978), we estimate that the lineages
leading to the modern-day genera of Limnodynastes, Heleioporus and
Notaden separated from one another in the late Cretaceous-early Palaeocene
(Fig.1).  The lineage leading to the modern species, L. ornatus and
L. spenceri, emerged about the same time in the Palaeocene and has had
a history independent of the remainder of Limnodynastes for the past 57-62
million years.  
            

</sample>
