Premature adult mortality and short-stay hospitalization in Western
Australia attributable to the smoking of tobacco, 1979-1983 By C. D'Arcy J. Holman and Ruth E. Shean  

ABSTRACT  The proportions of total deaths and premature adult mortality
in 1979-1983, and of short-stay hospital admissions and bed-days in 1983,
that were attributable to the smoking of tobacco were estimated in Western
Australia by the use of aetiological fractions that had been derived from
the published literature. Premature adult mortality was measured by the
person-years of life that were lost from ages 15 to 69 years
(PYLL6915). In men it was estimated that 25% of all deaths and
14% of PYLL6915 were attributable to smoking. In women the
corresponding proportions were 15% of deaths and 8% of PYLL6915.
The proportions of short-stay hospital bed-days that were attributable to
smoking were estimated at 7% in men and 3% in women; for hospital admissions
the estimates were 4% and 1% in men and women, respectively. In all,
tobacco-related disease and injury accounted for around 1700 deaths and
7500 short-stay hospitalizations each year in a population of 1.4 million
persons.
   (Med J Aust 1986; 145: 7-11)  

  In April 1985, the Commonwealth Department of Health produced a document
for the Special Premiers' Conference on Drug Abuse in Australia that was
entitled, "Statistics on drug abuse in Australia". In that paper it was
estimated that 16 620 deaths occurred in Australia in 1983 as a result of
the smoking of tobacco. When the same methods were applied to Western
Australian mortality data, the number of tobacco-related deaths was estimated
at 1204 a year.
  There are three reasons why we consider that the above figures underestimate
substantially the true number of deaths in our population that are
attributable to tobacco.
  First, the Commonwealth Department of Health estimate was based on
aetiological fractions that were derived by Drew. Drew generated these
fractions for the purpose of the estimation of tobacco-related deaths in
Australia from 1969 to 1980. Drew's calculations were based on sound methods,
and the utility and application of his report in this country have been
considerable. However, the aetiological fractions that were contained in
Drew's report were derived from the prevalence of smokers and recent ex-smokers
(that is, those who had given up smoking in the last five years) among
Australian men and women in February 1977.
  These exposed proportions of the population, 51.9% of men and 33.7% of
women, were combined with rate ratios for smoking-related diseases in which
the exposure contrasts were formed in terms of ever-smokers compared with
never-smokers. Thus, the appropriate prevalence of "exposure" to use with
these rate ratios was the proportion of persons who had ever smoked regularly,
which was estimated in February 1977 to be 63.7% and 39.0% of Australian
men and women, respectively. The effect of the exclusion of long-standing
ex-smokers from the prevalence estimates that were used in the calculations
was that the aetiological fractions were underestimated by an absolute
error of 2% to 4% (the relative error ranged from 4% for lung cancer in
men to 20% for cerebrovascular accidents in men).
  A second problem occurred because, although the prevalence of current
smoking in Australia from 1974 to 1983 remained constant in women and declined
slightly in men, the prevalence of those who had ever smoked regularly
increased, especially in women. In 1983, 68% of Australian men and 49% of
women had smoked at some time, compared with around 64% of men and 39% of
women in 1977. This trend towards a greater prevalence of persons who have
ever been regular smokers must be taken into account in applying Drew's
methods to deaths that have occurred in more recent time periods. This is
because the published estimates of rate ratios for tobacco-related diseases
apply to exposure status within six years of death, and, for this reason,
it is appropriate to combine them with the current prevalence of ever having
smoked. Failure to recognize this fact results in further underestimation
of tobacco-related deaths, particularly in women. Respiratory cancer mortality
rates in Western Australian women increased by 28% from 1973-1978 to 1979-1982.
It is likely that most of this increase reflected a greater prevalence of
women who had ever smoked regularly, for whom the latent period between
the onset of smoking and the occurrence of chronic smoking-related diseases
had elapsed.
  Thirdly, and most important, both Drew's estimates of tobacco-induced
deaths and those of the Commonwealth Department of Health excluded several
causes of death which are known, or very likely, to be smoking-related. These
are cancers of the pancreas, stomach, uterine cervix, bladder and kidney;
diseases of the pulmonary circulation, heart failure and complications
of heart disease; peripheral vascular disease; low birth weight; and injury
caused by fire.
  In this report we estimate the proportions and absolute numbers of all
deaths, premature adult mortality, short-stay hospital admissions and
short-stay hospital bed-days that were attributable to the use of tobacco
in Western Australia. To the extent that it was possible, we have incorporated
into our analysis the revised procedures that are necesssary to avoid 
overconservative estimates.

 Methods Mortality Data  
The total numbers of deaths that occurred in Western Australia in 1979-1982,
and the number of deaths in which the underlying cause of death was a
tobacco-related condition, were read from data tapes that were provided
by the Office of the Registrar General. For the purposes of analysis, deaths
were tabulated by underlying cause, sex and age at death in five-year groups.
 Hospital morbidity data  
The total numbers of short-stay hospital discharges and bed-days in 1983,
and those in which the principal condition that was treated during the hospital
stay was tobacco-related, were based on the Hospital Morbidity Data System
and were provided by the Planning and Research Branch of the Health Department
of Western Australia. Discharges and bed-days were tabulated by patient
sex and principal condition (except for injuries that were caused by fire
and flames, where use was made of external cause coding).
 Prevalence of smoking  
The derivation of most aetiological fractions required estimates of the
prevalence of persons who had ever smoked regularly in Western Australia
in 1979-1983. For this purpose we used the results that were reported by
Armstrong and Butler from the 1980 National Heart Foundation Risk Factor
Prevalence Survey which was conducted in Perth. It was estimated that 61.5%
of men and 43.6% of women had ever smoked cigarettes regularly. The 95%
confidence intervals for these estimates were 56.9%-66.1% in men and
41.3%-45.9% in women. No woman had smoked a pipe or cigars exclusively,
whereas 4.2% of men had done so. However, exclusive pipe and cigar smokers
were not included in the prevalence estimate for men.
 Aetiological fractions  
Revised aetiological fractions for tobacco-related diseases and injury were
derived by the use of the following methods.
  Cancers of the lip (ICD-9 140); mouth (141,143-145); salivary glands
(142); pharynx (146-149); oesophagus (150); stomach(151); pancreas (157);
nasal cavities and accessory sinuses (160, which includes the middle ear);
larynx (161); trachea, bronchus and lung (162); uterine cervix (180); bladder
(188); kidney and other urinary organs (189); as well as carcinoma-in-situ
of the respiratory system (231) are known or suspected to be smoking-related.
With the exceptions of cancers of the salivary glands and of the nasal cavities
and accessory sinuses, we accepted that the strength of the evidence of
the association of these cancer sites with smoking was sufficient to warrant
their inclusion in our calculation of tobacco-related hospitalization and
mortality. Raw figures that pertained to the two excluded sites are present
but were not used in the analysis.
  Aetiological fractions (F) were derived from the formula 

    
where RR, the rate ratio in those who had ever smoked regularly compared
with non-smokers, was taken from the American Cancer Society (ACS) results
which are in Appendix Tables A and B of the 1982 US Surgeon General's report
on the health consequences of smoking. The prevalence of ever having smoked
regularly, P, was estimated from the results of Armstrong and Butler.
  Thus, for lung cancer in women, RR = 3.58 and P = 0.436. Therefore:

    .
For men, separate ACS rate ratio estimates were available for ages 45-64
and 65-79 years. As such we calculated separate aetiological fractions for
these two age groupings, and in the final analysis used a weighted average
in which the weights were the numbers of cancer site-specific deaths at
ages of less than 65 years and ages of 65 years or more.
  No rate ratio was available for renal cancer in women and an aetiological
fraction of one-half that estimated in men was assigned on the basis of
the relative position of men and women with respect to fractions that applied
to other cancer sites. The generalization of ACS rate ratios to Western
Australia was considered valid for all the cancer sites that were studied
with the exception of lip cancer. For cancer of the lip it was considered
necesary to make adjustment for sunlight-induced cases, which probably account
for a higher proportion of lip cancers in Western Australia than in the United
States as a whole. An arbitrary multiplicative adjustment factor of 0.5
was applied. In any case the numbers of deaths from and hospital admissions
for lip cancer were small (see Tables 1 and 2).
  Aetiological fractions of ischaemic heart disease (410-414), and
cerebrovascular disease other than subarachnoid haemorrhage (431-438) were
calculated by means of the rate ratios of Garfinkel.
  For diseases of the pulmonary circulation (415-417) we assigned aetiological
fractions that were identical to those that were calculated for chronic
bronchitis and emphysema based on the view that the latter are the underlying
cause in most cases of acute and chronic pulmonary circulatory problems.
  Heart failure and ill-defined descriptions and complications of heart
disease (428-429) were coded as the underlying cause of death or the principal
condition that was treated during the hospital stay in substantial numbers
of instances (see Tables 1 and 2). In our view, a very high likelihood exists
that most of these deaths and hospital admissions, which were often ascribed
to "congestive cardiac failure" and other similar non-specific diagnosis,
were due to ischaemic heart disease. As such we have applied the aetiological
fractions of 0.31 in men and 0.22 in women as were derived for ischaemic
heart disease.
  Aetiological fractions for peripheral vascular disease were derived by
means of rate ratios from a case-control study of intermittent claudication
that was reported by Hughson et al.
  As with heart disease, for chronic bronchitis and emphysema (490-492,496)
the aetiological fractions were calculated by means of the rate ratios of
Garfinkel. Although it was considered likely that smoking was a contributory
cause in a proportion of respiratory diseases that were diagnosed as
pneumoconioses (for example, silicosis, asbestosis), because of insufficient
information we did not attempt to derive aetiological fractions of
pneumoconioses due to smoking.
  The aetiological fraction of low birth weight due to smoking was taken
as the average of five estimates from the different studies that were
summarized in Table 1 of Meyer. The average estimate was 0.32.
  The proportion of fire deaths due to smoking was estimated by a review
of the records of these deaths that were kept by the Coroner's Office.
Forty-two of a total of 55 fire deaths were investigated by the Coroner,
and of these smoking was determined to be the underlying cause without doubt
in three. A further eight fire deaths were classified as possibly being
due to smoking (for example, a "respiratory cripple" on oxygen who caught
fire in bed; a person with a high postmortem alcohol level who was burnt
while asleep in a hotel). In calculating our estimate of the aetiological
fraction we assumed that one-half of the eight "possible" deaths were truly
caused by cigarette smoking. Thus, our estimate was 7/42 = 0.17.
Method of analysis
The person-years of life lost (PYLL) were calculated by the method of
Hakulinen and Teppo, which was based on Chiang's approach to the problem
of estimation of death rates after the removal of some, but not all, causes
of death.
              
