Existence and regularity results for Maxwell's equations in the quasi-static
limit By A.L. Carey and D.M. O'Brien Abstract  

We prove the existence of solutions of Maxwell's equations for a conducting
medium whose constitutive parameters are piecewise constant on    and then
examine the convergence of these solutions in the quasi-static limit in
which displacement currents are neglected. Secondly, we examine the regularity
of the limiting solution and the sense in which the classical boundary
conditions hold, namely, continuity of the tangential electric field and
the normal current density.

      1. Introduction  

The work described in this paper arose from a study of the electromagnetic
prospecting technique used by geophysicists. The aim of the technique is
to determine the extent and electrical properties of a conducting ore body,
buried in a layered conducting ground, from transient electromagnetic
observations at the surface. In the usual experimental arrangement, a
horizontal transmitting loop is laid upon the ground and is driven by a
current pulse or current ramp. The fields induced in the buried ore body
then generate secondary currents in a receiving loop, and these are recorded
for subsequent analysis. In order to model this technique, one must be able
to solve Maxwell's equations in a structured medium. When the structure
is simple, such as in a layered medium without ore body, or a spherical
or cylindrical ore body in a non-conducting earth, then the techniques of
classical analysis yield solutions in series of special functions which
are easily computable and fairly reliable. In more complex structures, one
is forced to use a finite element or finite difference representation of
the electromagnetic fields. In addition, it is sometimes necessary to couple
the finite element representation to an integral representation in order
to adequately acount for boundary conditions at infinity. The successful
application of finite elements and subsequent analysis of the errors presumes
knowledge of the regularity of the electromagnetic fields near the interfaces.
According to classical electromagnetism the tangential component of both
the electric and magnetic field intensities must be continuous across any
interface between media with different constitutive parameters. However,
greater precision is needed in order to tackle the numerical analysis of
Maxwell's equations. In particular, in what sense must the tangential
components be continuous, and how discontinuous are the normal components?
We were unable to find definitive answers in the literature for Maxwell's
equations in a complex medium. Nor could we find results immediately applicable
in the quasi-static limit, used in the electromagnetic prospecting problem
in which Maxwell's equations degenerate into a parabolic system. This paper
is an attempt to answer these questions. As such it is a first step in
extending the approach of [3] (for a layered earth) to more complicated
geometries.
  In this paper we are concerned with existence and regularity results for
Maxwell's equations in a conducting medium,

                   

in the quasi-static limit as   . The notation used here is standard:
  (1) E and H are the electric and magnetic field intensities;
  (2)    is the density of electric charge;
  (3) J is the total current density, σE is the conduction current
density, and K is a known current density maintained by an external energy
source;
  (4)    is the permeability,    the permittivity and σ
the conductivity.
We shall require that    be constant on    but allow    and
   to be piecewise constant functions. More precisely, we suppose
that       ...,    are disjoint open regions whose closures cover    and whose boundaries are smooth and that 

                            .

In addition, we shall suppose that the source K is switched on at time zero,
and that E, H and ρ are all zero prior to time zero. Consequently, ρ will
vanish for all time in the interior of regions where ε/   is constant,
except possibly at points where   . K is non-zero, as the charge density
will be a distribution concentrated on the interfaces between regions with
different values of ?/  .
  In physical terms, the quasi-static limit is equivalent to the neglect
of displacement currents. This is usually a good approximation in the
propagation of low-frequency waves through conducting media, and also in
the transient electromagnetic (TEM) response of a conducting medium when
observations are made long after the passage of the wave fronts. One practical
application, already mentioned, is to TEM prospecting, in which geophysicists
measure the response of the conducting earth to a controlled current source
in the search for buried ore bodies and oil deposits. This application has
an extensive literature, which can be traced from the text by Wait [4].
  Duvaut and Lions [1] have given an elegant existence proof for the case
in which    is non-zero, but their technique fails in the quasi-static
limit. Our approach is to deal directly with the equation for E, namely
  
which holds under our assumptions that    is constant. We apply the
Laplace transform to equation (2) and solve the resulting elliptic problem,
  
where the lower-case e and k denote the Laplace transforms of E and K, and
s is the Laplace transform variable. The solution of (3) satisfies a bound
                  
where    and    denote the minima of    and   .
This bound is well behaved as    and so enables us to pass to the
quasi-static limit.
  An open and interesting question is what happens to the results if   
is zero (with    not identically zero)? Explicit calculations for
the special case of a half space (ie.   ;    show that the solution
is not    so that one expects solutions in weighted Sobolev spaces in general.
  The classical boundary conditions are that the tangential components of e and
the normal component of σe should be continuous across any section, Γ, of
the interface between two regions,    and    with different 
constitutive parameters. We use elliptic regularity to establish 
differentiability of e away from an interface and then in order to analyse the 
boundary conditions, we resolve e into its transverse component    and 
longitudinal component   
                   .

We then show that    lies in the Sobolev space    which implies that all
components of    are continuous. Next we show that    where n is the 
normal to    is continuous in the sense that the traces of    on    from
   and    are equal as distributions in   . Together, these
results establish the (weak) continuity of n x e across   . Lastly, we show
that    is continuous across    in a similar sense.
  Whether stronger continuity results are possible we leave as an open
question.
  We do not distinguish notationally between scalar and vector fields on
   nor between spaces of such fields. Thus,    will denote the usual Sobolev
space of r times weakly differentiable functions on    with the inner product

                    

and corresponding norm

                    

as well as the similar space of vector functions on    with inner product

                    

and corresponding norm

                    .

When r = 0, we will omit the subscript from both the norm and inner product.
All other notation is standard and follows, for example, that in reference
[1].

      2.  Existence  

  Our proof of the existence theorem follows the traditional approach in
which the initial-value problem for Maxwell's equations is converted into
an elliptic equation, after Laplace transformation of the time coordinate.
In order to be able to guarantee that the Laplace transform can be inverted,
we have placed fairly strong smoothness conditions on the source of the
electromagnetic fields. In fact, these conditions are too strong for the
most commonly used model of the source current, namely, a square current
pulse. However, the conditions can be weakened but only at the expense of
introducing distributional Laplace transforms, with attendant notational
complications, which we felt unwarranted for this paper. A second feature
of the proof is the division of the fields into longitudinal and transverse
components. The significance of this procedure is that the longitudinal
and transverse components have different regularity properties.
  We begin with the classical result of Helmholtz, which asserts that any
vector field can be decomposed uniquely into longitudinal and transverse
fields. Let    and    denote the projections on    defined by:

                          

where      denotes the Fourier transform. Then in fact PL is an orthogonal
projection on    for any   . To see this, note that

                    

and so if u is in    then the right-hand side is finite, which
establishes that    also lies in   . For any    we let

                    

and call    and    the transverse and longitudinal components
of u. It is easy to check that these components satisfy

                     and   .

In order to formulate the existence and regularity results we need some
technicalities. The first of these we record as

  LEMMA 1.    if and only if       and & Formula;.

  To prove this, use the identity

                    

to give
              
           .

  Consequently,    if and only if all terms on the right are finite,
that is    and   .

  We now turn to the Laplace-transformed version of the operator in equation
(2), namely,
                    

where

                     

and A is the operator defined as follows. Let

                    

and let A denote the operator on    with domain D(A) and action

                       .

Note that Lemma 1 shows that D(A) has an alternative characterisation:

                    .

We shall show that the equation
 
                            

has a unique solution u in D(A) for any f in   . From this solution
we shall construct the solution of Maxwell's equations by inverse Laplace
transformation. To do this we need a second technical result, namely that
A is non-negative and self-adjoint. The former is easy, since for any   

                     

so A is non-negative.
  We prove next that A is closed. Suppose that    is a sequence in
D(A) which converges to u in    and that    converges to υ in
  . Because    and because    we see that   .
Consequently,    and   . Hence A is closed.
  Now let   . Then the form    is certainly continuous for
all ?. For such u,

                   .

Thus,    from which it follows that    and   . Since
A is symmetric, this establishes that    and hence that A is
self-adjoint.
  We may now state the main result of this section.

THEOREM. Let
                   .

and require that   . The equation

                   

has a unique solution for any f in   . If    and    denote the
minima of    and    then

                   .  

Lastly, if f is holomorphic in s in the region    then so too is u.


  Proof. The proof uses a Galerkin approximation and relies on the positivity
of A,    and   . Let       be a basis for D(A) and suppose
that
                   

where          are chosen so that

                   .   

Note, firstly that   . Indeed, if this were not so, there would exist
   such that

                    
and hence that
                   .   

Since A is positive, equation (7) implies that

                   
 and
                   .  

The only possible solution of (9) is    since    and    which is
inconsistent with (8). Returning to equation (6), we find that

                   
so
                   .  

Since    we obtain
                 
  
and
                   .  

Because       and    are all positive,    and imag(u,f) must have the same sign.
Multiply (11) by    (12) by    and add to obtain

                   .
Hence,
                   .

It now follows that
            
                   
 
from which we obtain

                   .

  For each m we may construct in this way a solution of (6), which we now
denote by   . The sequence    is bounded, so we can select a
subsequence    such that    weakly as   . Consider the
equation
                   .
Then
                   .

In the limit as   
 
                   .

Since this holds for all j, we have

                   

so the form

                   

is continuous on D(A) in the    topology. Thus    and

                   .

This shows that u is a solution of 

                   .

Clearly,
                   .

  Since (q  A) is an entire function of s,    will be holomorphic
wherever it exists: in particular,    will be holomorphic for   .
 Thus, if f is holomorphic for    so too will be u.

  A corollary of this theorem is the existence of a unique solution of (2),
provided that the source current density K is sufficiently well behaved
to permit the inversion of the Laplace transform.

  COROLLARY. Suppose that the    valued function K has the following properties
  (1) K has support   ;
  (2) K is infinitely differentiable with respect to t;
  (3) K is Laplace transformable for real s > 0.
Then the equation

             

has a unique solution with the  same properties.

  REMARK.   At the cost of quite considerable notational complexity, one could use  the same argument to prove  existence and uniqueness for sources K which are distributions in the variable, provided one also invokes results on distributional Laplace transforms.

