Aboriginal Australian net hunting By L. D. Satterthwait  

  Game capture in nets was a common practice in many parts of Aboriginal
  Australia. The nets used for this purpose varied considerably in size and
  form, were employed in a variety of environmental settings and were applied
  to the procurement of a major proportion of the terrestrial, aquatic and
  avian prey species available on the continent. Because net hunting was so
  prevalent among hunter-gatherers around the world, Aboriginal net hunting
  can be regarded as an Australian manifestation of a worldwide phenomenon.
  
The care-free bands of birds.
Beasts of the wild, tribes of the sea.
In netted toils he takes.
The Subtle One.
      
 Sophocles, Antigone  

Carleton Coon (1971:98) once observed that the use of nets to capture game
on land was `so rare among hunters' that he was able to locate only three
examples in the available literature: the Mbuti of Zaire, the Birhor
of India and certain Queensland Aborigines. The latter reportedly used nets
to trap wallabies, but there were `neither details nor verification' for
this.
  Net hunting was, however, an exceedingly common practice in Australia,
where many Aboriginal populations - like hunter-gatherers elsewhere - used
nets to procure birds, terrestrial game and aquatic mammals. Although it
has received mention in regional ethnographic reconstructions, there has
been only one previous survey of the continent-wide extent of net hunting
in Australia, and this in the context of a broader examination of the
hunting techniques used in Oceania (Anell 1960). My purpose in the following
is to bring together and update the information on Australian net hunting
and to provide a summary account of its distribution, the materials and
techniques employed in net manufacture and the uses to which hunting nets
were put. Australian net hunting is also briefly considered in relation
to net hunting among other hunting and gathering peoples. Detailed analysis
of hunting techniques and examination of the considerable social and economic
implications of this practice are complex subjects in their own right and
will be the concern of separate papers (Satterthwait 1985a, b).
  Net hunting in Australia on any large scale seems to have ceased early
in this century, in part because it was most prevalent in those regions
subjected to the earliest and most destructive phases of European colonization.
Consequently, the record of Aboriginal net hunting is scattered over a
number of sources, including the accounts of explorers and missionaries,
the diaries and reminiscences of early colonists, local histories, popular
accounts of life in the colonies, the reports of government officials,
informants' reflections, museum specimens, and even
newspaper articles. Although dispersed, sometimes cursory and occasionally 
presenting problems of interpretation, these sources nevertheless amply show 
net hunting to have been a significant Aboriginal production activity.

 The Distribution of Net Hunting in Australia  
Localities where net hunts reportedly occurred are shown in Figure 1.
The sources cited in Anell's (1960) review of hunting and fowling methods
in Australia and Oceania provide the primary basis for this map, augmented
by further evidence available from the following: 
    
Because of the paucity of information on net hunting in the arid centre
of the continent, it has been regarded as absent from this region (Anell
1960:4, Lawrence 1969:232). However, the tangible evidence of three nets
in the Museum of Victoria, one (No. 44547) provenanced to the Peterman Ranges
and the other two (Nos 134 and 135) identified as `South Arunta' wallaby
nets (Spencer 1901:42), suggests that net hunting was in fact pursued in
certain parts of the Centre and this has been denoted in the figure.
  Although the information summarized in Figure 1 is undoubtedly incomplete,
the map does demonstrate that net hunting was a common practice over much
of the continent. The largest region of net hunting extended from the riverine
eastern margin of Central Australia to the eastern seaboard, and from southern
Victoria and South Australia to the base of Cape York Peninsula (Within
this region, however, nets were evidently not employed in the southern
highlands of New South Wales [Flood 1980:86] and possibly other circumscribed
areas as well.) Another major region of net use appears to have extended
in a band across Western Australia, from the southwestern interior to the
Pilbara coast. Unfortunately, net hunting in Western Australia is less
extensively documented than is net hunting on the eastern side of the
continent. In this respect, while the map clearly indicates the major regions
of net use, it is not necessarily a reliable indicator of the relative
frequency of such hunts. The greater number of reports for eastern Australia
is very likely a product of the greater intensity of early European exploration
and colonization in this area.
  A notable feature of the distribution of net hunting is that it was not
co-extensive with the distribution of net fishing. In at least two areas,
Central Australia and northwestern New South Wales, hunting nets were used,
but fishing nets were not (Reid 1886-87:178). On the other hand, fishing
nets are used by the Aboriginal peoples of Cape York Peninsula, Arnhem Land
and the central coast of Western Australia, but there is no indication that
net hunting was practised in these areas. In Tasmania neither hunting nor
fishing nets were employed, although woven basket-traps were evidently
manufactured for the capture of birds (Robinson 1966:722).
  Another important feature of the distribution of net hunting is its disjunct
character, with large areas for which there are no reports of net hunting
bracketed by or adjacent to areas in which it was prevalent. Where net hunting
was most widespread, there appears to have been a close association with
riverine settings or better watered coastal districts. This reflects one
of the environmental contraints on net hunting. Because nets cannot be
projected any great distance, they are generally stationary, or nearly so,
when in use. Hence they are applied to the capture of either stationary
or slowly moving prey or to moving prey which travel into the net. As a
result, nets are most successfully used where game are plentiful, concentrated
and, above all, predictable - conditions that more readily ensure that net
and prey will come into contact with one another.
  This probably accounts for the lack of reports of net hunting in most
of the desert regions of the central and west-central interior. It also
suggests why the evidence for net hunting in the Centre associates it with
areas of upland terrain and the capture of wallabies. In contrast to the
plains, desert ranges provide more reliable sources of water to which game
are attracted, while also furnishing the habitat for such animals as euros
and rock-wallabies, animals that tend to be more localized in distribution
and which follow established runs among the rocks. It is not surprising
then, that in desert regions the more involved hunting technologies tended
to occur among populations with access to substantial areas of elevated
terrain (Satterthwait 1980b:271-274).                   
  Environmental constraints do not account, however, for the apparent absence
of net hunting in the more productive and seasonally reliable habitats of
northern Australia and the coastal southwest. Here the explanation may reside
in the use of similar, but alternative means of game capture, such as basket
and wickerwork traps (Roth 1901a:29, 1901b: 15, 1903:47), or in the broader
socioeconomic concomitants of net hunting, particularly when such hunts
were co-operative in nature. Since in many cases areas of net use bordered
areas of non use, differential diffusion would not seem to provide an
explanation for the pattern of distribution.

 Net Manufacture  
Hunting nets were constructed in a range of shapes and sizes, from sack-like
devices less than a metre in diameter to long, planar structures several
hundred metres in length.
  Diversity in form was matched by an equal degree of diversity in materials.
Materials reportedly used in net manufacture are listed in Table 1. It
appears that the materials most widely used in nets for large game, emus
and kangaroos, were kurrajong and hibiscus fibres, and for waterfowl, fibre
derived from reeds. Other birds and mammals were taken in nets made from
a range of materials, including Triodea spp., Ficus spp., Psoralea spp.,
grass fibres and sinew. Unfortunately, many early observers only
vaguely identified net materials or used then prevailing common
names. Where possible, scientific names have been included in Table 1;
otherwise the relevant entry is limited to the common name given in the
original source.
    
A notable feature of Aboriginal net making is that both plant and animal
materials were used. The animal materials employed include sinew and string
made from human or animal hair, although there is a doubtful reference to
the use of kangaroo `thongs' (Puxley 1923:156). Sinews require relatively
little preparation for use. Once removed from the tail or hind limbs of
an animal and cleaned, the sinews were wound on a stick or section of bone,
where they dried and would keep for some time. Their use required only that
they be made supple again by moistening in the mouth and chewing (Roth
1901b:8).
  In contrast to animal sinews, the preparation of plant fibres for the
making of cordage was a much more involved process. Depending on the plant
species, fibre extraction involved various combinations of the following
procedures: soaking in water; carding with the teeth or hands; drying in
the sun; beating or rubbing with sticks, stones or clubs; and peeling,
stripping, scraping, chewing and teasing (Bundock 1978:262, Colliver and
Woolston 1966:27, Eyre 1845, vol. 2:311, Helms 1895:396, Kerwin and Breen
1981:289, McPherson 1978:249, Parker 1905:107, Petrie 1975:67, Roth 1901b:8).
An alternative to maceration as a means of separating fibre from pith was
to bury the plant stems or stalks in the ground until the non-fibrous tissues
had rotted away (Hale and Tindale 1925: 48). Some species were baked or steamed
in earth ovens prior to separation of the fibre (Beveridge 1889:73, Bulmer
n.d., Parker 1905:107). In at least one area, fibre was obtained by collecting
the quads of fibre ejected by eaters of roasted Typha roots (Krefft 
1862-65:361).
  The prepared fibre was next spun into string or rope by rolling the fibres
together over the thigh with the palm of the hand (Beveridge 1889:71-72),
Bulmer n.d., Colliver and Woolston 1966:27, Eyre 1845, vol. 2:311, Fairholme
1984, Parker 1905:107, Petrie 1975:67, Roth 1901b:10). In some areas the
process was assisted by the use of a simple spindle - a hooked stick or
stick with short cross-pieces attached near one end - which was rotated
over the spinner's thigh while the fibres were fed onto it (Brokensha 1975:54,
Kerwin and Breen 1981:289, Roth 1901b:7, 8). Doubling the fibre strand back
on itself and spinning it again resulted in two-ply cord, the type used
in hunting nets. Existing museum specimens indicate that completed net cord
ranged in diameter from one mm (Australian QE1781, both bird nets) to nine
mm (a dugong net, University of Queensland Anthropology museum 24362),
depending on the intended use.
  All hunting nets were made with the `netting stitch' or `knotted netting',
the most widespread netting technique used in Australia (Davidson 1933:257-258,
268-271, Nunn and West 1979:8, Roth 1901b:13-14). This technique results in a 
series of mesh knots variously known as sheet bends, weaver's knots or reef 
knots. When used, netting shuttles and needles took the form of sticks, 
sections of wood or lengths of reed (Eyre 1845, vol. 2:310, Kerwin
and Breen 1981:290, McPherson 1978:249, Roth 1897:97). It seems that gauges
for obtaining consistent mesh sizes were not generally employed in Australia,
the fingers or, in the case of large-meshed nets, the feet being used in
their place (Beveridge 1889:76), Bulmer n.d., Eyre 1845, vol. 2:310-311,
McPherson 1978:249, Roth 1897:97). A possible exception is Petrie's (1975:67)
comment that the Aboriginal people of the Moreton Bay region `used to measure
to get the correct size of mesh'. Unlike fishing nets, which were often
painted with ochre and grease or even tanned in bark solutions (Lamond
1950:169), there seems to have been little further treatment of hunting
nets after their completion, although some nets were smoked prior to use
(Angas 1847a:100).

