By Peter O'Connor 5 MEETING THE DREAM  

Aristotle claimed that `the most skilled interpreter of dreams is he who
has the faculty of observing resemblances'. This statement is still valid
today, since `resemblances' lead us to think in `as if' terms; that is, in
metaphorical terms. As Jung said: `Every interpretation necessarily remains
an "as if", simply because psychic images are not necessarily images in
the ordinary sense of the word, rather are psychic images, images as
metaphors, resemblances. The dictionary says that metaphors transfer meaning,
so the image, as metaphor, transfers meaning from the outer world to the
inner world. Thus, if we for a moment return to the idea of image as not
what one sees, but a way of seeing, then to see imaginatively, which is
what a dream does, is to see resemblances, to see things, people, or events
as `as if' rather than `is'. Therefore, images and imagination, the stuff
of dreams, are not unreal, as Corbin reminded us, but, on the contrary,
they are another reality, an `as if' reality. So, if we are to follow Hillman's
dictum, repeated several times already in this book, to `stick to the image',
then in practical terms it means that we must stick to an `as if' way of
dealing with images and dreams and avoid literalising them. We could easily
and readily detect signs of literalisation in such phrases and words as
`is', `it's only natural', `surely you would agree', or `if this, then that'.
All these phrases, in particular the word `is', point outwards to the literal
world of events, the world of salt, to use the alchemical metaphor, a concrete
view of the world. This mode of viewing, the concrete, is the most dangerous
way to approach an image or a dream, because it pulls, pushes, and badgers
the dream out of the world of metaphor, out of resemblences, out of `as
if', to `IS'. As the dream does not exist there in the literal world, it
can be denigrated and scoffed at only when it tries to be there. Thus the
literalists can once again reinforce their concrete view of the world as
the one and only view of it, and another round of `seeing the world as flat'
is commenced. The literalists or pragmatists among us, sometimes referred
to as the people having `lots of common sense' (the emphasis ought to be
on the common), will collude with the intellectual (mind) and demand that
we provide proof for the dream, or that we demonstrate evidence, cause,
and effect. Again, the dream, like poetry, does not exist in the realm of
positivism, but in the realm of metaphor - soul is a metaphor and dreams
are the language of the soul.
  Repeatedly I find that when the imagery in a dream makes a person anxious,
the more anxious they become, the greater the tendency is to literalise
the dreams. `Oh. I know why I dreamed of John B. last night, it was because
I was speaking to him only yesterday' or `I know why I dreamed that, it
was because of my poor relationship with my mother.' Here we see the
intellectual literalist (mind or sulphur) at work, telling the dream what
it means, in order, I contend, to contain his or her anxiety about what
the dream may actually mean. So long as we can tell it, then we can maintain
the illusion that we are in control: all is well and in order. Yet Jung
reminds us that `The mystery of dreams [is] that one does not dream, one
is dreamt'.
  Another way in which we damage the images of dreams is to approach them
with rational interpretations, mind interpretations, instead of soul: `Oh.
That is my shadow' or `That is my animus.' Having identified it by a nice
Jungian term, we can then sit back and feel safe, safe from having been
touched by the dream. When we lose our contact with the metaphorical quality
of a dream, its imagery, then we lose contact with soul and tend to call
into operation either body, in the form of a body of fact, or mind, in terms
of theories and concepts. One classical way of losing touch with the metaphor
is through using the body of facts we call personal history. By reducing
the meaning of a dream back to our personal history, back to a specific event
in our childhood, we are literalising it by facts, and have lost contact
with the metaphor. Hence the limitations of the Freudian reductive approach
back to childhood. Alternatively, theories and concepts are the other flight
away from the metaphorical perspective. Flight into rational thinking takes
the very specific form of asking `Why?', inevitably a rational question,
which is based on the assumption of something causing something else to happen.
Then we can build an intellectual (mind or spirit) edifice and burn the
dream images up with sulphuric reasoning, which leaves them parched and
discoloured, but to our conscious relief, the threat of the dream's meaning
revealing itself has at least temporarily been halted. Causality (and the
intellectual seeking of causes) in relation to dreams is perhaps one of
the major ways in which we incorrectly and destructively approach a dream.
`Why?' is fundamentally motivated by curiosity, and curiosity turns the
focus of attention into an object to be looked at, but not participated
in and with. So the mind question `Why?' to a dream distances us from the
dream, antisepticises us from the dream, but in destroying the bugs it kills
the dream. Curiosity, the motivating force behind the question `Why?', also
tends to lead us into interrogating the dream for its meaning, chasing after
it in such a way that the dream has no choice but to elude us. Curiosity
is a destructive way to approach a dream, because it usually springs from
feelings of doubt and uncertainty, and therefore, instead of listening to
the dream, we tend to want to make it conform with what we already know
consciously in order to alleviate our anxiety. Curiosity and asking `Why?'
tend to rush the dream, want to move it on along too quickly, not allowing
time in the unconscious mind, where soul resides or hides. To St Bernard
of Clairvaux, whose Nosce Te ipsum describes the spriritual discipline of
self-knowledge, the primary step off the path of self-knowledge was not pride,
was not sloth, not lust - but curiosity! He speaks mainly of its
destructiveness in terms of the harm the curious mind can cause the peace
of soul and spiritual enlightenment.
  I have observed again and again this flight into mind via the question `Why?',
and yet it is so destructive a way to approach a dream. Some people have
already asked the `Why?' before I see them and then produce a fait accompli
interpretation of the dream, primarily to keep me and them away from it.
But, as a rule of thumb, one can safely assume that if one knows what the
dream is about, then one would not have had it! James Hall, a Jungian analyst
who has contributed substantially to our knowledge of dreams, says: `If you
already know what the dream seems to be saying, then you have missed its
meaning.' Others simply begin the work on a dream - the work always being
composed of a dialogue between dreamer and listener - by asking: `Why would
I have this dream?' `Why would I dream of my aunt Joan?' The question is
usually followed by `Oh. That's a stupid thing to have dreamed of' or `How
silly of me to have dreamed of that'.            
  In these simple statements one can see the denigration caused by the
anxiety of the dream, and the need to dismiss it that lies just behind the
`Why?' When the `Why?' does not work as a way of avoiding meeting the dream,
then denigration seems inevitably to come next. Intellectuals - or, in Jungian
terms, thinking types - tend to denigrate the dreams more subtly by answering
the `Why?' question. These are the people who find it most difficult to
meet their dreams, because they want to meet it on their own ego-conscious
terms, they want to tell the dream what it means and forget the fact that
they and their intellects were asleep when they had the dreams. As Jung
said: `It dreamt them.'
  Resorting to the body of facts or soaring up to the lofty heights of the
intellect are two ways, two very common ways, in which we avoid a true meeting
with our dream. This is simply because both these extremes do a violence
to the `as if' quality of a dream. In other words, they de-soul the dream,
remove its psychic quality. This is not to suggest that the psyche does
not need both thinking (spirit) and concrete reality (facts), rather is
it to make the point that both mind and facts are destructive when they
assume a priority over the image and, as a consequence , take things at face
value only, robbing them of their metaphorical value; that is, their soul
significance. What we established in the previous chapter was that the
transformation of an event into an experience was achieved through images,
through psyche or soul. To rob the event of its metaphorical value, of its
resemblance, of its `as if' quality, is to sever the inner connection to
the event, leaving it merely as an event with no meaning. The literalist
is finally a destroyer of meaning, since she or he does not want events
to be any more than they are and she or he is obsessed with is and detests
`as if'. Thus, for the literalist, it is either `is' or `is not', an attitude
that is totally contradictory to the world of dreams, since the meaning
of a dream is never exhausted, even if it seems completely understood.
  Having discussed some of the ways in which we ought not to approach a dream
or meet the dream, the task remains to outline some positive or useful
techniques for approaching a dream. To do this, we must first briefly return
to the nature of images as they appear in dreams, since this will establish
the world we are approaching. Having established it, then one can discuss
what sort of conscious attitude to adopt towards the dream. By now it has
become clear that dreams are composed of images, but what one also knows
is that these images in a dream are not linked together in a linear, straight
line, cause-and-effect manner, they are linked together by connections,
almost like a painting or a piece of sculpture. The parts form coherences,
because no part or image has priority over the other. Patricia Berry has
called this connective form the `full democracy of the image'. That is,
all parts have an equal right to be heard, and there exists no privileged
positions such as we would have in an ordinary cause-and-effect model. The
images also in part depend on each other for meaning, so we cannot take
one bit of a dream and interpret it in isolation without doing some violence
to the complexity of the dream itself. Calvin Hall confirms this viewpoint
when he asserts:
  A dream is an organic whole; one part of a dream should not be lifted
  out of context and interpreted for itself alone. The dream should be
  interpreted as a whole, because it reflects an interconnected network
  of ideas in the mind of the dreamer.
  Another way of speaking about this is to say that images in a dream seem
to appear simultaneously; that is, no part precedes or causes another part
of the dream. So, in a way, it does not matter which part comes first, since
as in a painting all is given at once. It is only when we need to narrate
the dream that we impose order upon it.  Yet, even then, one can find oneself saying: 'While this or that was going on, so was this and that.'

