<sample>
	<id> J32 </id>
	


	<note> 2020 words </note>
	


	<source> Australian Journal of Linguistics - 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Structural change in language obsolescence: some eastern Australian
examples </h>
	


	<bl> By Peter Austin </bl>
	


	<h>1. INTRODUCTION </h>
	

The phenomenon of `language obsolescence' or `language death' was first
discussed in Swadesh 1948 but has only come to the attention of linguists
in the last decade, especially as a result of the work of Nancy Dorian (1973,
1978, 1981). In 1977 the International Journal of the Sociology of Language
devoted an entire volume (Dressler and Wodak-Leodolter 1977) to the topic
of language death. Other recent papers include Voegelin and Voegelin 1977
and Hill 1980; the latter work contains an extensive bibliography on the
subject. 
  Much of the material published to date on language obsolescence
has dealt with the sociolinguistic aspects of language contact, acculturation,
and changes which have occurred in the speech community as language usage
and preferences have changed. There has been a small amount of published
research on the consequences of language obsolescence for the structure
of the languages involved and the ways their phonology, morphology and syntax
have changed (see Dorian 1973, 1978, 1981; Dressler 1972; Dixon 1984; Hill
1973, 1980; Schmidt 1983, 1985). The present paper is a set of observations,
based upon my own work and the grammatical descriptions of Donaldson 1980
and Eades 1976, documenting some of the structural changes which have taken
place in a number of eastern Australian languages as a result of contact
with and domination by English.


	<h>2. SOCIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE OBSOLESCENCE </h>
	

Kloss 1984 (cited in Edwards (1985:49)) identifies three ways that languages
die: (a) language death without language shift; (b) language death because of 
language shift; and (c) nominal language death through a metamorphosis (e.g 
downgrading to dialect status). Most instances of language obsolescence or 
language death reported so far involve language replacement or shift, that is,
descendents of members of a speech community no longer speak the former
language but have switched to another one. Typically, the language of a
socially and politically dominant group replaces the speech of a (numerically)
smaller, less powerful group in the community. Many of the recorded examples
are of major Indo-European languages (English, Spanish, French) superseding
smaller minority languages (both Indo-European, e.g. Gaelic, or Breton,
and non-Indo-European, e.g. American Indian, Australian). Typically
obsolescence follows a phase of unstable bilingualism and represents the
terminus of a language shift. Extremely rare is the case of a language dying
because of the death of its last fluent monolingual speaker, although Swadesh
mentions Yahi, as spoken by Ishi, as an example. Much more common is for
monolingual speakers to be replaced by bilinguals and finally by monolinguals
in the replacing language.
  The replacement process can take quite a long time and the period of
obsolescence or death may extend over many generations, making it difficult
to say exactly when a language has died (in the sense of being totally
extinguished). Dorian has identified two types of speakers to be found in
the terminal phase of a dying language; to these we can add a further two
found in the last stages in Australia and elsewhere:

  (1) fluent speakers - bilinguals showing linguistic and sociolinguistic
competence in the dying language;

  (2) semi-speakers - bilinguals showing a reduction in their linguistic
repertoire and range of usage vis-a-vis fluent speakers - semispeakers
can often produce words of sentences in the language but show limitations
in structure and function. (Note, semi-speakers can often appear to have
greater fluency than they do depending upon their sociolinguistic skills and
ability to interact appropriately with fluent speakers);
  
  (3) former speakers - the last speakers of a language who may once have
been fluent but because of a period of disuse (during which there has been
no-one else to use the language with) show very limited ability to use their
former language;

  (4) rememberers - those who are able to recall a limited amount of lexical
material or fixed locutions in a language which they once heard spoken but
never really learned. Rememberers may exist many generations after the death
of the last speaker - for example, Tasmanian languages ceased to be spoken in 
the last quarter of last century but in 1972 Terry Crowley was able to tape-
record words and phrases in Tasmanian from two rememberers whose mother had 
been a former speaker (see Dixon and Crowley 1981).
  The exact mixture of speakers in a speech community in which a language
is dying varies tremendously from group to group. There are a number of
sociocultural factors which interact to influence the fate of a dying language,
affecting its learning, use and recall in its last stages of disuse. These
factors are social, personal and historical and hence the actual process
of loss may be quite different in different communities. In general, however,
we find for dying languages: 

  (1) a narrowing and reduction of the communicative situations in which
the language is used, which leads to:
 
  (2) a narrowing of functional range within which the language operates,
leading in turn to:

  (3) a narrowing and reduction in total linguistic repertoire. This is
characterized by the loss of stylistic variation (&quot;stylistic shrinkage&quot;
is Dressler's term) and, later, structural effects on the remaining single
style, including:

    (a)  lexical reduction

    (b)  phonological levelling, with loss or confusion of earlier contrasts

    (c)  morphological reduction and levelling

    (d)  syntactic reduction and fossilisation, including a decrease in
         frequency or loss of strategies for producing complex sentences
         (subordination and coordination).

  In the following sections we examine some instances of such structural
changes in Aboriginal languages of eastern Australia.


	<h>3. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND </h>
	

When eastern Australia was claimed in 1770 by the English explorer Captain 
James Cook there was probably an Aboriginal population of 300,000 divided into 
600 `tribes' speaking 250 languages (Blake &amp; Dixon 1979:1). In 1788 a colony 
was established at the present site of Sydney (New South Wales) and initially 
amicable relations between the original inhabitants and the white immigrant 
population were begun. Over the years and with the establishment of
new colonies at Melbourne (Victoria), Hobart (Tasmania) and Perth (Western
Australia) in the early part of the nineteenth century, tensions developed
between the two groups and open conflict broke out. There were murders,
massacres of large groups of Aborigines and extermination of whole tribal
populations. Foreign disease introduced by the colonists also took its toll
and the population fell dramatically to the point where the Aborigines were
held to be a &quot;dying  race&quot;. By 1876 the last Tasmanian full blood was dead
and it was felt that other groups would face a similar fate. The demographic
situation reached its lowest ebb in the 1930's, since which time Aboriginal
populations, especially in the north, have been expanding rapidly. There
are currently about 150,000 Aborigines (including full and part Aborigines)
living throughout Australia.
  The present-day linguistic situation can be divided into two areas. Firstly,
in the south (including southern and central Queensland, New South Wales,
Victoria, eastern South Australia and southern Western Australia) the languages
are either extinct or remembered by their last few speakers. In the north,
on the other hand, the languages are still spoken actively and for some
the speech community is expanding (some of the smaller languages are being
replaced by other Australian languages). Bilingual education programs are
operating in a number of areas and the survival prospects of some of the
languages are good, at least in the short term.
  Linguists working in the southern part of Australia, including myself,
have too often in the past been concerned with recording the structures
of the dying languages, usually from the oldest fluent speakers available,
while ignoring the contemporary speech situation. Varieties of language
spoken by generations below the oldest have been regularly ignored. The
only notable exceptions to this lack of concern in Australia with whole
community studies are Donaldson 1980 (see below), and Douglas 1976, which
contains an interesting discussion of the Nyungar language and its contemporary
variant &quot;Neo-Nyungar&quot;, spoken in the south-west of Western Australia.
  Recently there has been an upsurge of interest in the range of contemporary
language varieties, including styles being acquired and used by children
and adolescents (see Bavin 1987, Bavin and Shopen 1987, Black 1981, Dixon
1984, Lee 1983, Schmidt 1983, 1985). As Australianists become more aware
of the issues involved there may well be more and better discussion of both
the sociolonguistic and linguistic structures of speech communities, not
just of the isolated elders preserving the `pure' form of the Aboriginal
language.


	<h>4. THREE EASTERN AUSTRALIAN LANGUAGES </h>
	

I will be concerned with three languages spoken in New South Wales, Kamilaraay
(also known as Kamilaroi) from the slopes and plains around the Namoi river
system (including as a dialect Yuwaalaraay - see Austin, Williams and Wurm
1980, and Williams 1980), Ngiyampaa (or Wangaaypuwan) spoken in western
New South Wales near the Lachlan River (Donaldson 1980, 1985), and Dharawal
spoken on the south coast near the Victorian border (Eades 1976). All three
languages are on the way to extinction. Kamilaraay seems, from the available
evidence, to be quite closely related to Ngiyampaa; probably belonging to
the same subgroup as it (Austin, Williams and Wurm 1980). The exact
relationship between this subgroup and Dharawal has yet to be determined.
  Hill (1980:2) points out that there are two possible approaches to the
study of language obsolescence and death: 

  (1) longitudinal - comparing text material of several known dates;

  (2) the simulation of time depth by comparison of contemporary speakers
over a range of linguistic expertise.

These approaches may be supported by contrastive analysis of the languages
in contact to identify features in the dying language that have arisen from
the process of shift, for example, incorporation of phonetic segments or
syntactic structures from the dominant language.
  In the case of Kamilaraay and Ngiyampaa we have two closely related languages
to which these methods of investigation can be applied:

  (a) for Kamilaraay we have good recordings dating back to the 1870's (Ridley
1875, Greenway 1877) together with records from trained linguists from 1955,
when the last fluent speaker was still alive (Wurm 1955a), and 1975 (Austin
1975). For the Yuwaalaraay dialect we have Williams 1980 which is a descriptive
grammar based on the speech of the last two fluent speakers recorded by
her in 1975-78 (and by Janet Mathews several years earlier), together with
Wurm's 1955 material (Wurm 1955b);

  (b) for Ngiyampaa there are poor early recordings from the turn of the
century (Mathews, 1902, 1903, 1904) and Donaldson's detailed work carried
out during 1973-77 (resulting in Donaldson 1980, 1985) with all members of
the speech community then living, ranging from fluent speakers through to
rememberers with knowledge of only a few words.
We are thus in a unique position to document structural changes which have
taken place in the languages over time. Eades' 1976 study of the remnants
of Dharawal can be used as a comparative and confirmatory source.


	<h>4.1 Kamilaraay </h>
	

Earliest recordings of Kamilaraay date from the 1850's and include large
amounts of material written down by the missionaries Ridley and Greenway.
Around 1910 the amateur anthropologist R.H. Mathews recorded quite detailed
information (unfortunately fairly poor phonetically) including texts from
what seem to have been fluent speakers. In 1938 Tindale was able to collect
a text in Kamilaraay from an old man who had spoken the language in his
youth (see Austin and Tindale 1985). By 1949 Marie Reay found that:

  
	<note> quote </note>
	

She also describes the process by which the use of the language came to
be suppressed:

  
	<note> quote </note>
	

As a result of this connotation of shame connected with the use of the
Aboriginal languages they came to be more and more private languages used in
the domain of the family. Children grew up hearing them spoken less and less,
especially by their peer groups, and so the number of fluent speakers declined
rapidly. By 1955 S.A. Wurm was only able to find one fluent speaker of
Kamilaraay still living (he died within a year of Wurm's visit) and it is to
him that we owe recent relaible phonetic transcriptions with a fair amount of
morphological detail. Wurm 1955a consists of 44 pages of notes and is
accompanied by a 13 minute tape-recording of 118 sentences and some songs. 


</sample>
