<sample>
	<id> J33 </id>
	


	<note> 2004 words </note>
	


	<source> Northern Territory pidgins and the origin of kriol </source>
	


	<bl> By John W. Harris </bl>
	


	<misc> Travel by Aboriginal people to Macassar and to other parts of the South-east
Asian archipelago </misc>
	

Visits by Aboriginal people to Macassar are widely acknowledged in the
literature. Substantial Aboriginal narratives exist, some of the most detailed
being from Groote Eylandt and Elcho Island (Berndt and Berndt 1954:50-63).
Detailed prau records from Raffles Bay in 1829 show that the Pattie Djawaija
carried a crew of 37 `besides 4 black natives who were going to Macassar'
(see Macknight 1976:130-131). Barker (1829:7 May) described these particular
Aboriginal travellers in his diary. On an earlier occasion, he recorded
that the crew of a prau had
 
  ... described a very good race of Blacks (in the Gulf of Carpentaria as
  well as I could make out) who ... spoke a little Malay. Several had been
  at Macassar, probably 100 and some were there now. 
	<misc> (Barker 1829:2Apr.)</misc>
	

This reference is almost certainly to Groote and Bickerton Islands. Any
reasonable conjecture as to the population of those islands in 1829 indicates
that a hundred visitors to Macassar represents a significant proportion
of the population (J. Harris 1984b:114). Barker did not actually record
any such voyages by Raffles Bay Aboriginal people, but some fourteen years
later at Port Essington, Jukes (1847:35) observed that a prau

  ... brought back a native of Port Essington, who had gone away with them
  last year to Macassar. This, we were told was not an uncommon occurrence
  as the natives of Port Essington are very fond of going abroad to see
  the world. 

Formal concern was expressed about this practice in official correspondence
during the 1870's at which time there seemed to be some doubt as to whether
the Aboriginal travellers went to Macassar voluntarily or under compulsion.
The matter was of particular concern to the official `Protector of Aborigines'
and was a frequent subject of correspondence between him and the Government
Resident in Darwin and between the Government Resident and the South Australian
Minister controlling the Northern Territory. Cadell reported on the matter both
from the north coast (SAA 790/1878/351) and from Macassar itself (SAA
790/1879/83), where recent legislation, requiring a deposit of 200 rupees
per person for crew members recruited in Macassar, was making it difficult
for Aboriginal people to secure return passages to Australia. The voyage
to `Macassar', however, seems to have been considered to be a normal feature
of the life of many of the younger Aboriginal men and of some women (Macknight
1976:86). The Aboriginal perception would appear to be that most of the
voyagers returned with exciting travellers' tales to tell.
  
  Many of the black men went back to the Malay country with the returning
  fleets and stayed through the intervening season. There are a few cases
  of men who stayed permanently and married Malay women, but this was very
  rare.  
  
	<misc>(Warner 1932:458) </misc>
	

  When people used to go from here to Macassar, they used to come back with
  stories about how they were treated there ... Our people liked to go there
  and see these different things ... where they made their dug-out canoes,
  and the beautiful cloth called liba, and their knives.  
  
	<misc>(Lamilami 1974:70)</misc>
	

The linguistic significance of this is that the Aboriginal people concerned
would have been obliged to gain some fluency in the language of the prau
crews and of the places where they lived, and they would have used these
skills in communicating with the trepangers in the years after they had
returned home to Australia. Clearly a significant number of Aboriginal people
went to Macassar itself as the commercial home-base of the trepang industry,
but it is also important to note that the term `Macassar' was used by Aboriginal
people to denote south-east Asia generally. Many Aboriginal people travelled
to and lived in places other than Macassar. Not only were there other ports
of call for the praus returning to Macassar, but an unknown number of people
had opportunities to travel even further afield (Berndt and Berndt 1954:50;
Worseley 1955:5). An interesting example was noted by a semi-official survey
party in 1875 which met an Aboriginal man at Caledon Bay on the Western
side of the gulf of Carpenteria who had not only been to Macassar but also
to Singapore where he had learnt, among other things, a small amount of
English (SAA 790/1876/74). Tindale was able to record stories of such travels
on Groote Eylandt within twenty five years of the close of the industry
while people who had actually travelled away with the praus were still alive.

  Several old men of the Ingura (Anindilyakwa) tribe, as youths, made voyages
  with the Malays, principally of Macassar, who regularly visited the North
  Australian coast until about twenty-five years ago, and are familiar with
  the language of Macassar, with sometimes a smattering of other languages,
  such as Bugi and Malay ...
  
  One very old Bartalumbu man, Yambukwa by name, was taken away before
  initiation, and spent many years in various foreign places, returning as a 
  middle-aged man ... He told us of woolly haired Papuans, of Timor Laut,
  Macassar, Ke, Aru, Banda, and many other places which I could not recognise
  by his names or descriptions. With the aid of one of our crew, a Macassar-Torres
  Strait half-caste, who conversed fluently with him, something was learned
  about the visits of the Malays.
	<misc> (Tindale 1925:130) </misc>
	

This involvement of Aboriginal people in the trepang industry outside
Australia, their travels around the archipelago and their sojourns in Macassar
itself indicate that those who underwent these experiences would have had
the opportunity to become familiar with the languages of the region. It
has been shown already that they were members of multilingual speech
communities and quite possibly had a tradition of using contact languages
that stretched back for several centuries. They were what Bickerton (1977:51)
calls `multilingual autodidacts' with well developed strategies for acquiring
other languages and they would certainly have gained knowledge of a number
of languages while overseas.
	<misc> (Urry and Walsh 1981:95)</misc>
	

Firstly, they would have gained increased familiarity with the lingua franca
of the ports, the `Portuguese-Malay' pidgin. The ease with which Aboriginal
people seem to have been able to merge into the cosmopolitan life of the
trading ports, when considered in the light of the sociolinguistic and
historical-linguistic logic of maritime trade expansion, argues for the
existence of a lingua franca which Aboriginal people first learnt in Australia,
used and expanded in South-east Asia, and then brought back with them, thus
enriching the local contact language.

  Secondly, those who remained for extended periods in Macassar itself would
have become familiar with Macassarese. In the life of the port city of Macassar
and in the Macassan households with whom they lived, Macassarese would
have been the normal means of communication. On their return to Australia,
these particular people would have retained reasonable facility in Macassarese.
As particular praus tended to return year after year to the same locality,
there to deal with the same groups, Aboriginal people who had returned from
Macassar would have been able to maintain annual direct contact with their
Macassan acquaintances. In these circumstances, it seems likely that
Macassarese could sometimes have been used in communication between native
Macassan trepangers and Aboriginal people on some parts of the coast. It
must also be noted that specifically Macassan crews did not visit all parts
of the coast and that relationships varied from locality to locality. There
was obviously a degree of friendship in some places. The Groote Eylandters
still speak of how welcome the trepangers were, how they were awaited each
year with excitement, and how flags were flown to guide them to where their
hosts were waiting. It was from places such as Groote Eylandt that Aboriginal
people travelled away with the `Macassans'. On some other parts of the coast
relationships were strained, in some cases quite antagonistic. Barker's
diary shows this clearly. In such places, the sort of limited communications
which would have occurred would most likely have been in a restricted form
of the `Portuguese-Malay' trade language.

Thirdly, Aboriginal people travelling around the archipelago in the
multilingual company of other people involved in the trepang trade, would
have had opportunities to learn something of yet other languages. There
are a number of records of Aboriginal people stating that they could speak
languages other than Macassarese, such as Buginese (Tindale 1925:130).
Earl also made such observations including one, reported in Stokes (1846:61)
in which an Aboriginal man spoke in `the New Guinea dialect' when addressed
in that language by a Ceramese who mistook him for a New Guinean.

The observation that some Aboriginal people knew and took pleasure in using
a number of Austronesian languages when the occasion allowed it, does not
detract from the fact that the situation demanded a lingua franca which,
Urry and Walsh (1979:95-98) argue, must have been based on the
`Portuguese-Malay' pidgin. It is not unlikely that the trepangers would
have used this pidgin in their first attempts at communication with Aboriginal
people. One cannot, however, ignore the predominance of people from Macassar
on some of the praus and the visits by Aboriginal people to Macassar itself.
These facts point strongly to the likelihood that in some parts of the coast,
there was considerable use of Macassarese or at the very least, that the
Australian version of the `Portuguese-Malay' pidgin contained a large number
of lexical items of Macassarese origin.

This view, however, must be balanced against the only piece of evidence
so far located of the trepangers' perception of the language. According
to Barker (1829:2 Apr.), the trepangers at Raffles Bay described Aboriginal
groups further to the East who `spoke a little Malay'. This is a very important
observation because unlike many references to `Malay', it is in the diary
of someone who, as already noted, distinguished between `Macassarese' and
`Malay' and who recorded the problems of communication with a trepanger
who could speak `only the Macassar tongue'. It appears that it was not the
language of Macassar but the `Portuguese-Malay' pidgin, the general language
of the trade in the archipelago, which was perceived by the trepangers
themselves as the language of the trepang trade in North Australian waters.
                                               
The discussion so far has only acknowledged the linguistic input of the
trepangers. In terms of what is normally understood to be the origin of pidgins,
the language or languages of the trepangers certainly appear to have been
the superstrate or target languages. The contact, however, spanned some
centuries and the question of Aboriginal contribution to the language of
the trade must also be considered. The strongest evidence of this comes
from the widespread use of the `Macassan' Pidgin between groups of Aboriginal
people.



	<h> The development of a lingua franca between Aboriginal people </h>
	

As has been discussed earlier, Aboriginal people of the northern coastal
regions belonged to multilingual speech communities and were quite able
to communicate with all neighbouring groups. When, however, Aboriginal people
used the raw materials of the languages of the trepang trade, which were
common to widely separated groups, and made from them a lingua franca for
use between themselves, it had far reaching sociolinguistic and cultural
consequences.
  
It may be presumed that the `Portuguese-Malay' pidgin, the trade language
of the archipelago, formed the basis of the contact language of the trepang
trade in this area. It may also be presumed, that in areas of intense contact
with specifically Macassan people and with Macassar itself, Macassarese
was also a language of communication. It should not, however, be presumed
that Macassarese or even the `Portuguese-Malay' pidgin was simply taken
and used, quite unmodified, by various groups of Aboriginal people in
communication with each other.

Urry and Walsh (1981:96) emphasise the necessity to distinguish between
the language of the trepang trade and the local lingua franca. Not to do
so is to deny Aboriginal people all creativity and linguistic innovation
in the development of the `Macassan' Pidgin which was to become their own
lingua franca, yet it is now extremely difficult to determine just what
the Aboriginal or substrate contribution may have been.


</sample>
