Colloquialism By Arthur Delbridge  

  There seem to me to be two questions about colloquialism for this Council:
first, what is it? Are there some characteristics of a word or a phrase
that would let you say confidently this is a colloquialism, or is not a
colloquialism? And supposing the answer to the first is "yes" - here's the
second question: in what circumstances is the use of colloquialism either
good or bad? What place does colloquialism hold in communicative competence?

  So let me start with the question of definition. And I shall work my way
into this question first entirely as a lexicographer, concerned only with
words and phrases as they may be listed and labelled in a dictionary.

  As you know, dictionaries often use colloquial as a status label, along
with other labels like formal, slang, coarse slang, taboo, informal, vulgar,
not in polite usage, deprecated, familiar etc. Now, where does colloq. fit
in that list of status labels, if they can be put in order between the two
extreme terms? The etymology of the word doesn't help much: Colloq. is an
English form of Latin colloquium; the loquium part means "speaking", and
col- is a variant of con, meaning "with". So colloquium etymologically is
speaking together, conversation, conference. But the usual sense of colloquial
(OED) is "belonging to common speech; characteristic of or proper to ordinary
conversation, as distinguished from formal or elevated language". This
definition suggests a dichotomy common and ordinary as against formal and
elevated.

  Now formal and elevated have an old-fashioned ring. They put you in mind
of the sort of journalism in which a policeman doesn't "go" but "proceeds",
and the news reporter arrives transpiring at every pore. Or perhaps the
words call up the parliamentary style of Edmund Burke, or the prose of Gibbon's
Decline and Fall. That definition was written for the Oxford English Dictionary
(OED) about a hundred years ago, and it has not been given any amendment
in the four volume supplement in which the Oxford editors concentrated on
twentieth-century English. But it's not hard to agree that the words used
in an editorial in say, The Sydney Morning Herald (SMH) or the Melbourne
Age are more formal than those of some columnists in the same papers. Among
critical reviews written in those papers, the vocabulary of reviews of "fine"
music concerts tends to be more formal than those of rock concerts. If you
had the job of rating on a scale of formality from 1 to 10 all the pieces
in a single issue of a modern daily newspaper, you'd probably have no
difficulty in using up all or most of the numbers; and if you could calculate
the median degree of formality for a number of different papers, it would
be interesting to see if that bore any relation to their circulation figures.
Even so you may be left with a feeling that formal is not quite the right
word for the extreme right-hand end. It is impersonal, detached, neutral
in tone, but it may well lack the sense of "front" that the word formal
suggests.

  Nevertheless, there is that dichotomy expressed in the Oxford, and the
colloquial is to be found on the lower side of it, a side which is itself
subdivided in a graduated way with a set of labels like taboo, coarse slang,
slang, colloquial. All else is on the higher side, as formal or elevated.

  This isn't very satisfactory, for it's so hard to find the basis of the
categories.  Let me illustrate with the OED's treatment of the word pull
in the Third Supplement of the OED in (see The Age Monthly Review Vol.
2 No. 11 March 1983). This Supplement, which presents twentieth century
usage, devotes seven and a half pages to recent uses of pull. We learn that
pull off (as in "clever enough to pull such a thing off") now has its status
amended: it had been slang in the Dictionary itself (that is, up to 1933);
but the label is changed to colloquial in the Supplement, on the evidence
of citations taken from Policeman's News (1918), H.G. Wells (1923), The Times
(1968) and The Times again (1977). To pull down a salary is labelled slang,
and to take a pull (at oneself) in the sense of pull oneself together, is
colloq. (chiefly Australian). The various sexual senses of pull are labelled
either slang or coarse slang, though it is not clear whether the distinctions
are on linguistic or moral grounds. And there are many senses of pull and
its phrases left unlabelled, (e.g. pull rank, pull the other one). One can't
imagine that the OED editor is implying that these are formal or elevated;
rather it seems that there must be a middle ground of words (perhaps
accommodating the majority of all English words) which are neither colloquial
nor formal in the senses suggested, but rather occupy a vast neutral ground
between the two. If one must have a complete classification expressed in
a range of usage labels, let's make it at least tripartite, with left to
right separated by a large central neutral class that accommodates words
like come and go, banana and apple, man and woman and (I suppose) person.

  Of course, it must be allowed that the same word might enter different
parts of this classification, depending on its meaning. The OED says,
charmingly, of the word bugger, that it is "found in decent use only as
a legal term for a sodomite or one who commits buggery". That use of the
word is not labelled. OED goes on to say that "in low language" bugger is
"a coarse term of abuse or insult". For this sense it is labelled coarse
slang. And so it is (though without any necessary sense of abuse or insult)
when the meaning is just "something unpleasant or undesirable" (that's a
bugger, What a bugger!). So it is, too, with the sense of "go away", as
in I think you'd better bugger off, and with the sense of occupying oneself
in a desultory fashion (bugger about), or the sense of "nothing at all",
in bugger all. All labelled coarse slang.

  I think the OED is typical of English dictionaries in the confused attitudes
it reveals in this sort of treatment. The Collins Dictionary changes the
labels - coarse slang becomes taboo slang. According to Collins it is slang
to say bugger about, but taboo slang to say bugger off. The Encyclopedic
World Dictionary admits that it is not always pejorative to call a person
or even a child a bugger: yet the label for this usage is taboo slang; the
label for bugger as a verb (as in bugger it) for a strong exclamation of
annoyance or disgust is the simple imperative: taboo, i.e. (according to
EWD's definition of that word) "forbidden to general use; placed under a
prohibition or ban".

  It was precisely this instance that led the Macquarie Dictionary team
to look again at questions of definition and labelling, and not for "swear
words" only, but for the whole vocabulary. If there is one thing that one
learns from the study of sociolinguistics, or indeed from simply observing
the way people choose their words in company, it is that there are many
factors in such choosing. The intended sense is just a first consideration
since it is usually important for it to be clear what you're referring to
(usually but not always). But that's not the end: suppose you intended to
say that something was good. According to the Macquarie Thesaurus you might
consider choosing an appropriate word from a list that included amazing,
bang-up, bonny (Scot.), bonzer, bosker, brave (Archaic), braw (Scot.),
budgeree, capital, castor, copasetic (US), corking, crackerjack, cracking,
crash-hot, daily, dandy, decent, desirable, excellent, extra, extra grouse,
etc., etc.

  How the choice is actually made depends on three principal factors.
Halliday's terms for them are tenor, field and mode. Tenor is the nature,
the personal nature, of the people present in the speech event, including
the speaker as well as those spoken to and those within hearing range, and
their role in the present occasion. Field is simply what is going on: a
feast, a funeral, a party. If a party, is it an apres ski, a bottle party,
a conversazione, a soiree, a shivoo, a reception? Choice of words depends
again partly on what role one has for this occasion: Are you host, guest
of honour, old family friend? Are you held to be the life of the party?
If so, do you want to fill the role in the expected way, or are you out
to surprise people, even shock them? The third term mode relates to what
part language is playing in the occasion.

  The choice is wide, whether you are using speech or writing, whether you
read aloud from a prepared script of do some ad-libbing, but the range of
choices is different for each medium of expression. I don't want to labour
the point; there are many factors which may constrain your choice on particular
occasions. You are aware of the constraints from your knowledge of the language
norms of the community you belong to. The major constraints tend to lead
you towards conformily with the norm, towards standard usage, towards being
conservatively safe, correct; particularly in public utterance, tho' less
so in intimate utterance. Nevertheless, your reaction to these constraints
is individual and occasional: the existence of a lexicographical constraint,
a label (like coarse slang or taboo) even if known about, may not influence
your decision at all.

  The Macquarie team formed the view that there is little to be gained from
using labels to create a dichotomy in the lexicon or of initiating a tripartite
classification in typical dictionary style. Rather, we felt we should mark
certain words to alert the dictionary user to the possibility of there being
constaints of one kind or another operating in the community against their
use at least in some particular situations. One could not specify the precise
strength of the constraint or which type of situation the constraint applied
to. All that could reasonably be done was to mark the word or phrase in
a cautionary way. It was our decision, then, to mark all such word uses
with the single label colloquial. And we defined colloquial as "appropriate
to or characterisitic of conversational speech or writing in which the speaker
or writer is under no particular constraint to choose standard, formal,
conservative, deferential, polite or grammatically unchallengeable words,
but feels free to choose words as appropriate from the informal, slang,
vulgar or taboo elements of the lexicon".

  We've never regretted making that decision, and on the whole it has been
very well received, because it did not pass judgement: instead it invited
the user to consider in what degree the use of the word was appropriate
to the speaker (or writer), the company, the roles involved and the situation.
It made the user the master, like Humpty Dumpty, and it is the user, also
like Humpty Dumpty, who pays. The user is responsible, as always.

  Now let me turn to the question of attitudes to colloquialism. These tend
to be polarised: the colloquial is seen as either good or bad. I quote a
note by Thomas Pyles, writing about George Santayana that "as might be expected
of one with his cultivated use of English, he uses colloquial in the sense
`familiar, easy-going, informal' (in Thomas Pyles Origins and Development
of the English Language, second ed., p.17) the meaning which it still has
among the highly educated. It is notable that in common usage the word has
come to mean `regional' or `local'... Hence a word which for many denotes
a quality altogether attractive and desirable (and in fact usually unavoidable)
has come frequently to denote what is supposed to be bad."

  Well there certainly is, especially in well-educated use, a perception
of "the colloquial" as naturally good. Daniel Jones in his English Pronouncing
Dictionary said simply and without argument that his dictionary records
"the pronunciation used by a considerable number of typical Southern English
people in ordinary conversation". 
    
