<sample>
	<id> J36 </id>
	


	<note> 2008 words </note>
	


	<source> Planning Federalism: Australian &amp; Canadian Experience </source>
	


	<bl> By Kenneth Wiltshire </bl>
	


	<h>1949 to 1961</h>
	

From 1949 to 1961 the word planning almost ceased to exist in the vocabulary
of the government. The Liberal-Country Party coalition had a strong free
enterprise platform aimed at reduction of all forms of government
intervention, and reduction of the size of the public sector. It was symbolized
by Menzies' efforts to reduce the size of the Commonwealth Public Service
by 10,000, a goal which was achieved over five years by nonreplacement of
wastage. Clearly, this was an environment hostile to any form of planning,
even if confined to the public sector, and Menzies and his colleagues went
further, picking up the catch cries of the 1930s and reviving the old
association between the word &quot;planning&quot; and totalitarianism, and doing it
extremely effectively. The Australian economy was performing very well,
especially as a result of the Korean war boom, America and Britain were
progressing reasonably well without any elaborate planning mechanisms, and
Australia, like most of the western world, spent the 1950s talking of
industrialization, economic growth and development, exports, and even
decentralization - all of this within the general emotion and economic
environment of postwar reconstruction, free of the restrictions of wartime.
  Within the arena of federal financial relations Menzies retained the
centralized system of uniform taxation, and the 1950s saw most Premiers
Conferences centering around often bitter pleas for the &quot;return&quot; of such
taxing powers to the states. The Menzies government could see the benefits to 
themselves and to the people of a system ofone government imposing and 
collecting income tax at uniform rates across the nation, although in a fit of 
pique he once offered the states the return of the power only to find them 
politely declining the offer. A detailed examination of the federal 
consequences of uniform income tax is given in chapter 4, but it should be 
noted here that this created a profound vertical imbalance in the Australian 
federation which, from the point of view of the states, took away the largest 
single component of their revenue raising, and, they claimed, caused inevitable
difficulties in forecasting and resource allocation. The distribution of
the income tax revenue became a frequent issue.
  Menzies made a rather uncharacteristic move in 1954. This is of considerable
interest because it seemed to fly in the face of his opposition to both
centralism and planning. He argued that, in relation to state public works
for development, because the commonwealth was responsible for raising large
sums of money, it ought to assume some responsibility for its expenditure.
The 1954 policy speech contained this statement:

  
	<note> quote </note>
	
(Interestingly, many of these concepts were repeated by Whitlam in the period
1972-75 and denounced as socialist and centralist.) As Curtis suggests,
Menzies' notions struck at the very principle of a federal compact, and
in particular the right of states to decide regional interests. (Commonwealth
grants to the states for universities had commenced in 1950.) The idea of
determining truly national priorities for public works projects was not
new, and it had worked reasonably successfully on a more limited scale in
relation to the Development and Migration Commission, and for a short period,
through the wartime national Coordinator of Works. Nothing much came of
this new proposal, and it faded into the background, but it was not long
before the same philosophical basis found its expression in various specific
purpose grants to the states originated by the Menzies government a few
years later.
  The decade of the 1960s produced in Australia quite a different situation.
In 1961 an overheated economy produced the response of a credit squeeze from
the national government more severe than had been known hitherto. The political
result was an election where the Liberal-Country Party Coalition came
perilously close to defeat, winning by only one seat, and then only on
Communist Party preferences. The Menzies government thus became concerned
about the severity of economic fluctuation, and was persuaded to instigate
a &quot;Commmittee of Economic Enquiry&quot; which was appointed in February 1963.
The Committee had broad terms of reference and comprised an eminent and
influential team headed by James Vernon (chairman). Other members were J.G.
Crawford (vice-chairman), P.H. Karmel, D.G. Molesworth and K.B. Myer. The
Committee submitted their report but the Menzies government refused to make
it public, thereby fuelling speculation about its content. When it was
finally released it became obvious that the Vernon Committeee had been 
extremely impressed by the various indicative planning mechanisms in Western
Europe, as well as the role of the Economic Council of Canada. It was the
concept of interaction and dialogue between the public and private sectors,
which these overseas examples had accommodated, which attracted them, although
they were obviously impressed by the economic growth rates of those countries
as well - especially France and the EEC in general. So the Vernon report
placed strong emphasis on the need for economic growth but not as an end
in itself; rather as a means to achieve other economic and social aims.
Naturally the report contained many recommendations, but for our purposes
the most interesting was proposed machinery for a permanent Advisory Council
on Economic Growth, which was quickly construed as a desire for attention
to forward thinking and appropriate resource allocation. The Menzies government
managed to ignore the report, because when it was finally released, the
economy had picked up quite well again and the concerns expressed by the
Vernon Committee by that stage gave the appearance of being mere academic
debate.
  The Vernon Committee believed that institutional changes since 1945 had
helped to fill some of the gaps which had made a national economic policy
difficult to carry out before the war, and they mentioned specifically
stronger, legally-constituted, central banking, the High Court ruling of
1957 on uniform taxation, cooperation between commonwealth and state
governments, and machinery for government consultation with representative
bodies of the private sector in the formulation of both general and specific
economic measures. In providing the Vernon committee with its terms of
reference, the Menzies government stated its economic objectives as being
&quot;a high rate of economic and population growth with full employment, increasing
productivity, rising standards of living, external viability, and stability
of costs and prices&quot;. The Committee regarded economic growth as central
to all the other objectives, but strongly emphasized that the seven objectives
stated by the government were interrelated in a very complex way. They
were quite critical of the government's past emphasis on the short term
and its attendant &quot;stop-go&quot; policies. In relation to government expenditure
the Committee made this pertinent comment:

  
	<note> quote </note>
	

But on public investment they presented a completely different picture:

  
	<note> quote </note>
	

And in respect of the concept of planning:

  
	<note> quote </note>
	

A little later the committee went on to stress the importance of government
always taking long term trends into consideration in its decision making,
and the experience of other countries was cited in this respect, but nowhere
were the means of ensuring that this happened spelt out. Perhaps the nearest
they came to this was the recommendation for an Australian Advisory Council
somewhat similar to the Canadian Council. They did not comment on the form
which such a council would take, but its principal functions would include:

  To report as required on particular subjects.
  To prepare an annual review of growth experience and long-term prostpects.
  To maintain a constant review of and advise on trends in overseas investment,
  developement problems and any other matters that might be referred to
  it for special attention.
  To undertake, commission and encourage research bearing on its field of
  responsibility, and to publish research papers.
  
The committee saw the main advantages of such a body being that it would
provide for a constant yet independent review of long term trends, leading
to better public understanding of those trends, and the interdependence
of economic factors which must otherwise lead to dissension between various
key economic interest groups in the community. The advisory council, they
felt, should be comprised of people chosen for their ability and not as
representatives of groups; it should be small; have no executive powers
or responsibilities; with a strong secretariat; and confine itself to medium
and long term matters.
  The Vernon Report also made a number of significant observations about
public investment in Australia which went very much unnoticed. There were
major problems in planning and organizing public investment in the Australian
federation, they said. The root of the problem was that although state and
local governments undertook eighty per cent of public investment, they were
responsible for raising only part of this amount, because a large part of
such funds was raised by the commonwealth under Loan Council borrowing
programmes, as well as commonwealth money provided directly under specific
purpose payments. They went on to make the following pertinent observation:

  
	<note> quote </note>
	

The Vernon committee thought that because specific purpose grants took place
outside the Loan Council, and involved the commonwealth directly in the
problems of the state, they should therefore provide a basis for joint
commonwealth-state planning of particular projects. However, this in itself
was dangerous from an overall point of view, because a project by project
approach increased the tendency to ad hoc bargaining and arrangements.
  Most of the public response to the Vernon report focused on the economic
content, and little attention was directed to the machinery recommendations.
Menzies labelled the suggestion for a special project commission as useless
and an advisory council as antidemocratic but, as was pointed out by at
least one author, the existence of these bodies would have reduced the
government's  options and forced it to justify taking any actions against
those recommended by such bodies.
  Although the main attempt of the decade to propagate some thinking about
economic planning had fizzled, there were a number of developments occurring
quite unobtrusively at this time in the public sector. The Defence Department,
like so many of its counterparts in other countries, had moved to five year
forward strategies, and the determination of annual fiscal appropriations in
the light of those five year forward projections. The post office, late in the
decade, introduced its own form of the Planning Programming Budgeting System,
and especially in the area of telephone installations, began quite
sophisticated projections of population movements and associated industrial
and domestic location patterns. Many of the intergovernmental grants and
agreements (a lot of them established by the Menzies government itself) moved
to either a quinquennial system (for example, roads and housing) or a
triennial system (universities) of resource allocation. Even in other areas,
such as education and science, annual conditional grants were prepared in the
light of longer term frameworks. These intergovernmental arrangements are
analysed in later chapters but their planning perspectives should be noted
here. Meanwhile the Loan Council continued, as always, to regard annual public
works commitments in the light of longer term lead times, although there is
substantial evidence to show that capital expenditure grants by the national
government were influenced more by political pork-barelling than by any thought
of efficient national resource allocation (especially after the various lessons
of the near-election defeat in 1961 where it became clear that there was not a
uniform spatial distribution of support for the national government).
  There had been some quite pronounced moves by almost all Australian states in
the 1960s to promote industrialization, and in some cases decentralization,
predominantly by means of carrots rather than sticks. Preferences were given by
all state governments in their own tendering to &quot;local&quot; firms, a typical
pattern being five per cent for firms in that state over interstate firms, and
a further five per cent over international firms. State governments also
fiddled with freight rates, road tax charges, and especially the provision of
cheap land and government guaranteed finance, in an effort to move industry,
but this met with very limited success. It seemed to take a long time for state
governments to realize that secondary industry was not particularly mobile and
that, in any event, tertiary industry made almost two-thirds of the labour
force, and the largest tertiary industry of all was the public sector directly
under their own control.  


</sample>
