By Alan Renouf Australia and the Soviet Union  

Before he became Prime Minister, Fraser was more hostile to China than to
the other communist giant, the Soviet Union. He believed that through the
Chinese populations of south-East Asian countries China could subvert the
region near Australia, that China had been behind the uprising in Indonesia
in 1965 and that she bore much of the responsibility for the defeat of the
United States, and of Australia, in the Vietnam War. However, by the time
he took office, Fraser had revised his thinking; he now saw the Soviet Union,
rather than China, as posing the main communist threat.
  Admittedly, the change in Fraser's outlook was not highly apparent in
the first six months of government - with one possible exception. On becoming
Prime Minister, Fraser promptly withdrew the Whitlam Government's de jure
recognition of the incorporation of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania into the
Soviet Union. Whitlam had believed that the incorporation of these states
into the Soviet Union reflected a long-standing and irreversible reality
and he had calculated that, by recognizing the Soviet action, Australia
would be better able to protect the interests of her citizens in the former
Baltic states. Moreover, the Whitlam Government had granted recognition
only after consultation with Australia's main allies, none of whom had
objected. However, when people of Baltic origin inside and outside Australia
criticized the Government's action (there was even a demonstration against
Whitlam at Niagara Falls), the Liberal-Country Party Opposition accused
Whitlam of currying favour with the Soviet Union. Although a Liberal-Country
Party Government had itself previously extended de facto recognition of
the incorporation, the Liberal and Country Parties now promised that, once
returned to power, they would rescind the de jure recognition. In these
circumstances, the decision taken by the Fraser government was not
interpreted as signifying any particular hostility to the Soviet Union.
  Although Russia anticipated that worse was to come, and said so publicly,
this flowed more from intuition than from anything Fraser and his colleagues
said or did in the early months in government. In his first foreign-policy
statement to Parliament, Peacock condemned the Soviet intervention in Angola
on the grounds that it was contrary to the rules of detente. But he allowed
that the involvement possibly `grew with events and opportunity' and did
not necessarily represent `an attempt to steal a march on and humiliate
the United States.' Moreover, the Fraser government was concerned not to
harm a trade that was greatly in Australia's favour; the government suggested
a joint shipping enterprise with the Soviet Union and permitted the start
of the scientific exchanges agreed during the Whitlam period.
  The moment of truth, revealing Fraser's real attitude to the Soviet Union,
came with his major foreign-policy speech to Parliament on 1 June 1976.
The manner in which this speech was prepared has been discussed earlier.
Of more significance was the substance of the initial draft circulated by
the Prime Minister. The finished product was, for Russia, bad enough but
the first draft was even more antagonistic and vitriolic. The Prime Minister
invited a select group to present views and consultation with this group
led to some toning down of the text. Had the original text been pronounced,
it is highly likely that there would have been a violent reaction from the
Soviet Union, possibly a breach of diplomatic relations or at least a reduction
of imports from Australia.
  Fortunately, Fraser contained his more extreme attitudes but he left no
doubt about his basic antagonism toward the Soviet Union. After presenting
a classic conservative approach to international relations (power is the
major consideration and `we must face the world as it is and not as we would
like it to be') and denying that such an approach was pessimistic, Fraser
cited a number of factors to prove that peril lurked everywhere and that
the world environment was `deeply disturbing'. His central theme was Russia's
conduct. Although Fraser conceded that Russia was committed to the avoidance
of nuclear war, he argued that `reasonable people can, however, reasonably
conclude [that] the Soviet Union still seeks to expand its influence
throughout the world'. According to Fraser, Russian actions were too often
inconsistent with a reduction of tension. He instanced Russian policy in the
1973 Middle East War, in Vietnam, in Angola, the substantial growth of the
Soviet Navy and the expansion in the last decade of her armed forces by
a million men. The latter had produced a major discrepancy between the
seventy divisions of NATO and the 178 of the Warsaw Pact (even allowing
for the difference in the size of divisions), which eroded the advantage
of the better equipment of NATO's armies. Fraser claimed that Warsaw Pact
forces far exceeded the forces needed for the defence of Eastern Europe.
Moreover, the Soviet nuclear armoury was now so large that it provoked doubt
about Soviet motives - did it not display a desire for supremacy?
  There followed a denunciation of detente. The principal common interests
of the United States and of the Soviet Union, Fraser contended, were
limitation of the possibilities of nuclear conflict and an end to the wasteful
arms-race. Detente has been hailed as an advance, as a genuine, overall
relaxation and military tensions. Unhappily, reality had not lived up to
the aspirations of detente and, Fraser concluded, `Negotiations will
not succeed unless they are accompanied by a clear determination to maintain
a balance of forces and are free from illusions about the effectiveness
of unsupported goodwill.'
  Fraser's speech was avowedly one-sided. Clearly, the Soviet Union was
still seeking to expand her world influence but this was normal for great
powers and the United States was doing the same. In stressing Russia's
expansionist ambitions, Fraser missed the main point; the most serious problems
arose from the methods employed by Russia. Moreover, some of the instances
that Fraser cited to prove Russia's culpability lacked validity. For example,
Russia had attempted to prevent Egypt from starting the 1973 Middle East
War and, once the war had started, attempted to stop it. Also, in Vietnam,
the United States, not Russia, had intervened first.
  Fraser was on safer ground when he addressed the build-up in Russia's
armed forces. However, his implicit conclusion that Western defences were
no longer adequate was of doubtful validity and was not generally shared
by Western analysts. The growth of Soviet forces was largely explained by
Russia's need, since the 1960s, to secure her border with China where, in
1976, she maintained no less than forty-nine divisions. The Fraser Government
made no allowance for this very significant change in Soviet strategic
circumstances. 
  To justify his government's concern, the Prime Minister emphasized the
increase in Soviet defence-expenditures. The American administration had
recently estimated that the Soviet Union was spending on defence at least
twice as high a proportion of GNP as the United States. Nevertheless, this
did not necessarily warrant alarm as the Soviet economy was only slightly
more than half the size of the US economy. Non-American, Western outlays
far exceeded the non-Russian, Eastern outlays. Soviet defence industries
were not as efficient. Furthermore, it was natural that Russia, a superpower
with an empire stretching from the Arctic to the Pacific, should develop
a `blue-water' navy. As to the possibility that Russia was pursuing superiority
in nuclear weapons, even if true, there could be no question that the US
would allow herself to be outpaced. Besides, a Soviet nuclear supremacy
would be meaningless as long as the US retained the capacity to destroy
the Soviet Union at least once (as she surely would).
  Fraser's criticism of detente was also unconvincing, although in line
with the current fashion. He overlooked the fact that the policy of detente
had originated many years before the Helsinki Agreement was signed in 1972
and that it had yielded substantial, mutual benefits. It had, for example,
resolved the Berlin problem which he had predicted would cause endless crises.
For Fraser, detente was the latest version of 1930s style appeasement,
the disaster which had so much impressed him as a young man. However, the
circumstances of the post-1945 period were vastly different and no such parallel
could be drawn. The latter period had seen constant, largely effective
resistance to Soviet expansionism, not surrender to it. This had led to
the realization, with detente, that there was a means by which East-West
competition could be kept within proper limits without resorting to
confrontation, with all the waste and dangers that that implied.
  Shortly after his speech of 1 June 1976, Fraser visited China on his first
offical visit abroad. The choice of China represented a major departure
from previous practice of the Liberal-Country Party, whose Prime Ministers
had always visited Washington and London first, and a radical change for
a man who, not so long before, had been bitterly critical of China. In
Beijing, the Prime Minister found a large audience which relished his views
about Russia. These views ensured the success of the visit. However, Fraser's
Chinese hosts did not respond to his suggestion, indirectly expressed (and
probably overheard by `bugging'), that the United States, China, Japan
and Australia should form a front, including a military relationship, against
the common Soviet enemy. 
  A further slight to Russia soon followed. On 30 June, James Killen, the
Defence Minister, told a press conference that Russia's military build-up
represented a direct threat to Australia. Strongly criticized in private
by Peacock, Killen, within three hours, put out an `amplification,' denying
what he had said. When this did not allay the public criticisms of his conduct
(including a disavowal by the United States), Killen reverted to his original
statement. His performance was so strange and his statement so evidently
contrary to the views which the Government wished to uphold before the public
that the Soviet Union let it pass.
  This unfortunate but revealing incident, together with some unfavourable
media comment on Fraser's earlier speech, explains why, from this time until
the end of 1979, the Fraser government adopted a more restrained public
attitude toward Russia. There were two additional reasons for the Government's
increased restraint. Firstly, at this time, the United States did not entirely
share Fraser's hostile attitude. Secondly, Australian-Soviet trade, which
the Country party especially valued, was flourishing. By the end of 1976,
both Doug Anthony, the Deputy Prime Minister, and Peter Nixon, the Minister
for Transport - both members of the Country Party - had visited Moscow.
On returning to Australia, Anthony had broached the possibility of selling
uranium to Russia and Nixon had publicly presented Russian intentions as
non-hostile and non-aggressive. Indeed, Nixon announced an agreement to
extend scientific and other exchanges as a mark of cordiality in the
relationship. Evidently, the Government was resolved that, despite its leader's
sentiments, Australia would do business as usual.
  On 15 March 1977, Peacock attempted to rationalize the hostility of Fraser
to the Soviet Union and reconcile it with the attitude of Anthony and Nixon.
Unlike Fraser, who talked as if the East-West relationship had regressed
to a Cold War pitch, Peacock described the world situation as changed for
the better. The previous twenty-five years, he said, had been dominated
by superpower tension in an essentially bipolar situation. These years had
been characterized by priority given to the ideological and military dimensions
and by a high degree of political immobility, with Third World countries
being treated as objects, not as actors. All this had now altered, Peacock
claimed. The ability of the superpowers to control others and to determine
the agenda of international politics had declined and they now had to pay
more attention to third parties. While the question of the military balance
between them remained crucial, the conversion of military strength into
political power and influence had grown more complex and uncertain. The
potency of ideology had waned, pragmatism, scepticism and dissent had become
more prevalent, alignments were less fixed and the Third World was more
assertive. `In a less static, polarized and ideological world, we can afford
to give less weight to ideology and more to a discriminating evaluation
of national behaviour and capabilities'.

