Social harmony and Australian Labor: The role of private industry in the 
Curtin and Chifley governments' plans for Australian economic development By Carol Johnson  

The Chifley government's unsuccessful attempt to nationalize the banks has
given it the reputation of being a particularly radical and
socialist-influenced Labor government.  However, an examination of both
the Curtin and Chifley governments' attitudes towards private industry reveals
that in fact both governments believed that sections of private enterprise
had an important role to play in post-war economic development.  Much
government policy was designed to assist private industry since industrial
development was seen as playing an essential role in achieving Labor's
wider social aims.  Above all, both the Curtin and Chifley governments aimed
to develop a humanized capitalist society rather than a radical socialist
one.  While Labor remained hostile to private banking and believed that
the banks were holding back Australian economic development, other sections
of business were seen as socially beneficial and as sharing common interests
with the Australian people as a whole.  While there might be competition
between classes, their interests were not seen as being mutually incompatible.
Rather, elements of social harmony belief underlay both governments' policies
and strongly influenced their shared vision of post-war Australian society.


 Plans for Post-war Reconstruction  

The Curtin government had begun to prepare for its post-war tasks long before
the war ended.  It recognized that one of the major problems facing the
government would be the lack of federal powers once the defence powers were
no longer valid.  In 1944, the government attempted to extend its federal
powers by referendum.  However, the powers were only to last for five years
after the war ended.  The government asked for increased powers over
fourteen areas which included employment and unemployment; organized marketing
of commodities; companies; trusts, combines and monopolies; profiteering
and prices; the production and distribution of goods; the control of overseas
exchange, overseas investment and the raising of money and national works.
The government argued that these powers were essential for a smooth transition
from a war-time to a peace-time economy.  Curtin emphasized that the government
was not requesting excessive powers.  On the contrary, `the states have
all had these powers and have had them since last century.  The British,
South African and New Zealand Parliaments have these powers'.  He particularly
stressed that `no question of socialisation or any other fundamental alteration
in the economic system arises'.
  In fact, the `Yes' case in the Fourteen Powers Referendum was largely
justified in terms of the benefits it would bring to all sections of Australian
society.  The powers would prevent the Australian economy from sliding into
a serious depression.  They would ensure security of employment for wage
and salary workers.  Female workers would benefit from the continuation
of the Women's Employment Board.  Housewives would be saved from rocketing
food and clothing prices and from exorbitant rents.  Government pensions
and benefits brought in during war-time would be able to continue.  Farmers
would benefit from guaranteed prices and be assured of a reasonable income.
Regional development of industry would increase employment opportunities
and expand local markets.  Businessmen would benefit too.  Small businessmen
would benefit from legislation against monopolies and combines.  The government
would establish an aluminium smelting industry in Tasmania and assist the
shipbuilding industry.  Businessmen would be assured of necessary materials
and machinery.  The control of profiteering would not interfere with
businessmen making `fair' profits but would merely prevent `extortionate'
ones.
  However, the referendum proposals were defeated.  Despite such assurances,
the Opposition mounted a bitter campaign against them, arguing that the
proposals involved `the perpetuation of policies which have struck at the
whole root of freedom in Australia'.  By voting `No', citizens would be
`curbing the illegitimate authority of bureaucrats' and opposing a system
of industrial conscription which would order people to go to jobs selected
for them.
  The defeat of the Fourteen Powers Referendum was a major setback for Labor.
Nonetheless, the government still believed that it could achieve its major
aims and pressed ahead with its plans for post-war reconstruction.  These
plans were most clearly articulated in the 1945 White Paper on Full Employment.
The proposals in the White Paper epitomized the dominant tendencies in Labor
party ideology.  Its Keynesian-influenced arguments provided a rationale
for full employment, social welfare and an enlarged public sector which
argued that they would benefit the community as a whole, including sections
of private enterprise.  In the words of the White Paper:

                          

The White Paper argued that the amount of employment possible at any particular
time depended upon the volume of what was being produced, which in turn
depended upon the demand for goods and services by private individuals,
businesses, public authorities and overseas purchasers.  Therefore, in order
for full employment to be achieved, total expenditure had to be sufficient
to provide a market for the goods and services being produced.  Fluctuations
in total expenditure had to be offset.  For ease of explication, total
expenditure was divided into five component parts: public capital expenditure;
public expenditure on current services; private consumption expenditure;
private capital expenditure; and expenditure from overseas.  The White Paper
argued that fluctuations in private consumption spending could be offset
by achieving stability of incomes and employment.  Fluctuations in overseas
expenditure posed a major problem but could be lessened by international
agreements and by overseas governments instituting full employment policies
themselves.  Fluctuations in private capital expenditure also posed a problem.
  However, the White Paper argued that these problem areas of expenditure
could be largely offset by public capital expenditure.  Public capital
expenditure included expenditure by state, federal and local government
on railways, roads, bridges, buildings, land development, power and light,
irrigation and so on.  Public capital expenditure had always been particularly
important in the Australian economy but, traditionally, such expenditure
had been reduced in times of economic depression.  The White Paper
proposed that this previous policy be reversed, arguing that a `relatively
small' increase in public capital expenditure combined with an appropriate
banking policy could be used to stimulate private spending.  The increased
government expenditure would `give additional employment and incomes to
some producers; their extra spending will still further increase employment
and incomes, and this process will go on for some time multiplying itself'.
In short, as the White Paper summarized its own arguments: `The essential
component of full employment is that public expenditure should be high enough
to stimulate private spending to the point where the two together will provide
a demand for the total production of which the economy is capable when it
is fully employed'.
  Such a full employment policy would necessitate the `closest collaboration'
not only between state and federal governments but also between governments,
employers and trade unions.  The White Paper argued that these groups would
all collaborate since there would be benefits for all of them.  In addition
to the points mentioned earlier in this section, the White Paper argued
that the government's policy would result in increased efficiency and
production, due to increased expenditure on capital goods, and this is turn
would lead to a higher standard of living.  Rising living standards would
not only benefit those on lower incomes but would also have benefits for
business.  For example, `provision by governments of benefits in social
legislation permits a higher proportion of private income to be spent on
consumption goods and services.'  Increased consumption would benefit those
businesses producing or selling the goods that were bought and would enable
them to provide more jobs.  Similar arguments were put forward regarding
the quality of employment which should be provided.  For example, `intelligent
factory welfare provisions' could improve health and efficiency.  Shorter
working hours would have a similarly beneficial effect and any adverse effects
would `be offset by consequent improvements in ... efficiency'.
  Underlying the White Paper generally was the view that the interests of
all classes in capitalist society are interconnected.  Business would benefit
from full employment and government welfare benefits because more people
would be able to buy more of the products which business produced.  The
working class would benefit from a healthy business sector because private
enterprise would provide economic growth and higher standards of living.
In particular, the government would support private industry's major role
as an employer, rather than challenge it.  As the White Paper summed it
up: `Full employment will restore a sense of security to workers and
businessmen, and will ensure a revival of enterprise that will in turn,
ensure production of the goods and services wanted by the community'.
  It is noticeable that the White Paper took the workings of a capitalist
economy largely for granted.  Large sections of the paper revolved around
the role which government expenditure could play in stimulating private
capital expenditure and compensating for any drops in private investment.
The desirability of private capital investment playing such a crucial role
in the economy was never questioned.  Rather, it was assumed that capitalism
could work fairly efficiently and relatively equitably as long as the
government engaged in minor tinkering with its economic mechanism.  There
was no discussion of the fact that private investment depends on adequate
profits being made and is not decided on the basis of social utility.  There
was no discussion of whether the government could be successful in encouraging
socially beneficial private capital investment given that it had no control
over the levels or areas of such investment.  Similarly, the implications
for wage levels of the need to ensure adequate levels of profitability were
largely ignored.  Significantly, early drafts of the White Paper had contained
sections arguing that wage rises should be restrained in order to ensure
that they did not outstrip productivity increases or contribute to a cycle
of boom and bust.  The widespread introduction of piece-rates had been
suggested as one way of overcoming this problem, but this suggestion had
met with strong opposition and had therefore been removed although Chifley
was to advocate both piece-rates and wage restraint later on.  Keeping a
capitalist economy functioning smoothly was to have its price.
  Privately, a few left wing critics in both the government and the public
service pointed out the obvious fact that the White Paper was clearly a
blueprint for managing a capitalist economy rather than a plan for radical
social change.   However, such comments seem to have had little effect,
given that that was precisely what most members of the government appear
to have wanted.  The White Paper was also a relatively conservative document
in other ways.  It should be noted that the White Paper was largely a full
employment policy for men.  Although the White Paper often uses the term
`men' in a very ambiguous way, an informed reading suggests that the term
`men' usually meant precisely that.  Curtin and other male politicians tended
to assume that most women would wish to stay in the home in the post-war
period and the government was only advocating full employment for those
seeking work.  So central is the concern with men as the subjects of the
White Paper that the question of what would happen to women thrown out of
work by returning ex-servicemen was not even addressed.  Yet women were
only employed in `male' jobs during the war on the understanding that they
would be replaced by men when the war ended.  In 1941 Cabinet had approved
`the extensive employment of women in industries where men were not available
in sufficient numbers to attain the scale of production approved as a war
objective'.  However, the government had guaranteed that `all women employed
under the conditions approved shall be employed only for the duration of
the war, and shall be replaced by men as soon as they become available'.
Senator Cameron had comforted male trade unionists concerned at this
development by arguing that he `would far rather run the risk of additional
women in industry than of allowing Japanese to land on our shores'.  One
would therefore have expected the issue of women's employment to be discussed
in some detail, but this was not the case.
  The White Paper was to remain the most detailed overview of government
plans for Post-War Reconstruction.  

