By Peter W Young LLB Chapter 13 Preparation for a Personal Injury Case  

On 26 March, Butterworth received two briefs to settle statement of claim
in respect of the accident in which David Daniels died, one for Carol Carson
and one for Elaine. It was accompanied by a statement from each of the
plaintiffs, reports from the doctor who treated them, discharge summaries
in respect of each from the hospital and the depositions from the inquest
and particulars of expenses.
  He realised that there was no such thing as a standard statement of claim
to be used in all cases, knowing that each case was different and had to
be prepared individually, so he mastered the facts and thought deeply as
to what should be done. There were a variety of claims that could be made.
Elaine, for instance, not only had her own claim for personal injuries,
but also may have one under the Compensation to Relatives Act provided
that it could be shown that someone other than David Daniels was at least
partly responsible for his death. All that need be shown was a very small
degree of negligence by someone else because in a Compensation to Relatives
action, contributory negligence by the deceased is completely irrelevant.
(See s 10(4) of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1965 and Versic
v Conners [1968] 3 NSWR 770; 88 WN(NSW)(Pt 1) 332.)
  But Butterworth knew that there were some problems in sheeting home liability
to someone else, the only "someone else" there could be would be the driver
of this unidentified motor vehicle. He noticed that the solicitor had done
all the right things in respect of a claim against the Nominal Defendant
who, under the Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act, 1942, could be
sued for all damage caused by unidentified motor vehicles. The solicitor
had put advertisements in the paper and in newsagents' windows, all appealing
for anyone who saw the accident and who had not given his name already to
the police or to the plaintiff's solicitors, to do so.
  Butterworth looked at the medical evidence with respect to Elaine. She
was then only nine years of age. He knew that it is always extremely difficult
to know just what damage a child suffers in a motor car accident. With an
adult who has commenced on his career, one can say, for example, that the
man is a schoolteacher and that, normally speaking, he would have remained
one until he was 65 years of age and his wage is $X per week; the wage for
a car park attendant, which is all that the plaintiff can do now, is $X
minus $Y per week; accordingly one merely takes $Y per week for the appropriate
period and, after applying the appropriate discount rate, one has a fair
idea of future economic loss. However, with a child it is difficult to know
whether that child will qualify for a professional or semi-professional
career, or whether he or she will be employed at all.
  However, there was no real purpose in speculating about these matters
in Elaine's case, because these were problems in every case of an injured
child. All that could be done was to bear them in mind and to concentrate
on the hard facts of the present case. The main problem was trying to settle
it because it was so difficult to put a figure on what a court would award
such a young child. There was some protection here, though, because all infant
settlements had to be approved by the court under the Damages (Infants and
Persons of Unsound Mind) Act, 1929.
  Butterworth turned to the reports that were in his brief. It appeared
from what was said by Carol Carson that Elaine formerly had been almost
top of her class, but now was finding great difficulty in concentration.
That matter made him see a red light and to make a note that Elaine should
be assessed by a psychologist to see if there would be educational problems
as a result of her accident. In most motor car accident cases, not only
are the treating doctors called, but also consultant doctors who are used
to giving evidence. Most lawyers have a list of these people in their various
specialities who constantly give evidence for a plaintiff or for a defendant.
He thought that this was a case where Elaine should be seen by a consultant
and made a note of that as well.
  An important question was whom to sue. There was no problem at the present
stage because the rule of practice in personal injury cases is to sue anybody
who could possibly be liable as defendant. Accordingly, Butterworth made
a note that Carol Carson, the registered owner and the Nominal Defendant
should be the defendants. However, he had another thought that if he sued
Carol Carson, would the third party insurer contend that, because Elaine
had been struck, not by the motor vehicle, but by a wheel that had become
detached from the motor vehicle, her injuries did not arise out of the use
of a motor vehicle. If so, then the third party insurer (and the registered
owner as well unless the driver's agency for the registered owner was
established), would escape liability. Because of a possible problem with
insurance, Butterworth also added Dawn Daniels as executrix of David Daniels
as an additional defendant, who could be dismissed from the proceedings
later if the authorised insurer did not take any technical point on liability.
  When one has problems of this nature there is no substitute but to go
back to the Statute which creates the liability, and look at the exact words
used. Here, s 10(1)(b)(i) of the Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance)
Act, 1942, indicated that a third party policy covered "death of or bodily
injury to any person caused by or arising out of the use of the motor vehicle
...." The question was then, what was meant by "use of the motor vehicle"?
  If there is a similar problem of construction, it is no use just making
up one's own mind as to what one thinks the word means. It is almost certain
that there has been some decided case dealing with the topic. Usually, the
first place to look in this type of situation is an annotated Act, and for
motor vehicle work New South Wales lawyers look at Leslie and Britts Motor
Vehicle Law. Butterworth took out the volume and looked at the notes to
s 10. Doing this, he found a reference to Harvey Trinder v GIO(1964) 82
WN(Pt 1)(NSW) 201, with a note that it had been approved by the High Court
in (1966) 114 CLR 449. He checked the annotations to the New South Wales
Acts of Parliament put out by both law publishers. These gave him some other
cases including a note in (1966) 40 ALJ2, discussing GIO v R J Green & Lloyd
Pty Ltd (1966) 39 ALJR 429.
  Butterworth knew, however, that one could not content oneself with notes
in textbooks or journals, but it was necessary to go the cases themselves.
He read those cases, then went to the Australian Digest and made a note
of all the other cases in which the Harvey Trinder case had been mentioned.
This is known as noting up. Most barristers, as they peruse recent issues
of the law reports, make notes in the margins as to how later cases have
affected earlier ones. He had done this but always checked with the list
of noting up in the Australian Digest Master Volumes and in the Australian
Case Citator to make sure that he had all the references.
  Having read the Harvey Trinder case, he looked at the GIO v R J Green
one. First, although the reference he had was to the Australian Law Journal
Reports, he knew that it was prudent to see if the case had been reported
in the "authorised reports" which for the High Court were the Commonwealth
Law Reports. Although any law report made by a member of the Bar may be
read in court, Butterworth knew that judges mostly preferred people to read
the Commonwealth Law Reports in court rather than any others where High
Court cases were concered. Looking at the reports and the annotations, he
found more recent cases including Shortland County Council v GIO [1973]
2 NSWLR 257, which held that injury occurring when a vehicle was
unintentionally started in the course of testing arose out of the use of
a motor vehicle, and Stewart v Sydney County Council [1973] 1 NSWLR 444,
in which it was held that injury to an electricity serviceman by the door
of his van swinging to while he was getting equipment out of it, arose out
of the use of a motor vehicle.
  In view of all this he felt fairly sure that a court would hold that Elaine's
injury arose out of the use of a motor vehicle but he thought he should
record his researches clearly as it could well be that the authorised insurer
would take the point at the trial or in some interlocutory proceedings.
In respect to Elaine, he settled the draft limited to her personal injuries
as a result of being struck by the wheel. He named both Carol Carson and
the Nominal Defendant as defendants.
  The next problem was in which court to sue. Formerly, all large claims
in motor vehicle cases were brought in the Supreme Court, but nowadays many
people, if they believe the case will involve up to about $50,000, sue in
the District Court. The jurisdiction of that Court is $100,000, but it can
be increased by consent on filing a memorandum of unlimited jurisdiction
pursuant to s 51 of the District Courts Act, 1973. By filing such a memorandum
one eliminated the risk of the plaintiff's health deteriorating between
issue of process and trial which might mean a verdict of in excess of $100,000.
  In the instant case, Butterworth considered it appropriate to commence
both sets of proceedings in the Supreme Court. The only penalty that would
be paid, if he had wrongly assessed the situation, would be that all the
costs of the action would not be recovered, while an error the other way
could mean deprivation of a large amount of damages.
  He turned to the draft with respect to Carol Carson. She had three courses
of action, (a) for her own personal injuries; (b) under the Compensation
to Relatives Act for herself and Elaine if, and only if, negligence on the
part of the Nominal Defendant or someone else than David Daniels could be
proved; and (c) on the same proviso, an action by the estate of David Daniels
in respect of any loss he suffered before he died. Therefore, it was essential
to investigate further whether there was any real likelihood of the court
accepting that there was an unidentified motor vehicle involved in the
accident. Butterworth read carefully through the depositions from the Coroner's
Court. The only person who said anything about an unidentified motor vehicle
was Carol Carson, but he noticed the peculiar feature of the depositions
that did not seem to have been cross-examined on before the Coroner, namely,
the lack of clothing on the part of the driver.
  Although Butterworth had spent some time on the matter, he thought that
he should get more details before finally proceeding to settle a statement
of claim. He wrote a memorandum suggesting a further medical examination
of Carol Carson, and asking the solicitor to obtain a full statement from
her as to how David Daniels came to be dressed the way he was at the time
of collision. He could, of course, have merely asked the solicitor for a
conference, but his experience was that it was better to have the client
make a statement to the solicitor and hold a conference later to go through
the statement. It is quite surprising how people remember much more each time they have to go over a statement.  

