Grave fears on lack of privacy safeguards for ID card scheme  

  Some of the Law Council's constituent bodies had grave fears about the
lack of adequate safeguards against invasion of privacy by an Australia
Card system, Council representatives said in evidence at a public hearing
by the Federal Parliament's Joint Select Committee on an Australia Card.
  A member of the Council's Privacy Law Committee, Mr Hal Jackson, of Perth,
said it was absolutely essential that for any support the Law Council may
give the system there would need to be adequate and clearly spelt-out
safeguards in place before the Australia Card was introduced.
  The Secretary-General of the Law Council, Mr Philip Hawke, told the
committee that four of the Council's constituent bodies had made 
submissions opposing the Australia Card, and he believed it was likely, if 
present trends in the constituent bodies' thinking continued, that the Law 
Council at its General Meeting on April 19 would express opposition to the 
proposal.
  Mr Hawke and Mr Jackson were joined at the committee's hearing in Parliament
House by Mr Russell Stewart, of Sydney, representing the Taxation Committee
of the Council's Business Law Section.
  Mr Hawke said that the Law Council, in its formal submission to the
committee, had not come to any firm conclusion for or against the Australia
Card, and it would want to see any legislation which may be introduced before
it did so.
  Mr Jackson, in answer to questions from committee members, said any
Government would not be able to bind its successors. There was a fear that
the Australia Card would be put to a wider range of uses than presently
proposed, and evidence from all around the world showed that once the needs
of efficiency and fairness were considered there appeared to be a need for
more and more information.
  More and more departments would want to add to the bank of information,
and State Governments would want to use information about citizens, Mr Jackson
said.    
  He said there was a vast bureaucratic vested interest in not having controls
over the use of the information that would be stored under the Australia
Card system - controls which departments would see as interfering with their
efficiency.
  Mr Stewart said the Taxation Committee saw the Australia Card as largely
bringing into the tax-paying community those people in the cash economy,
but was not under any illusions that the determined criminal would still
find ways around the system. The card was more likely to bring into the
tax net those people for whom it became too much trouble to avoid tax.
  Mr Jackson said the card would apply to 15 million Australians who were
not determined criminals, as well as those who were. The proposal had come
up for serious consideration only at last year's Tax Summit and then in
the context of tax evasion and fraud. Already the possible uses of the
Australia Card had expanded to include detection of maintenance defaulters,
immigration matters, passports, social security and home loans. There were
suggestions that State registers of births, deaths and marriages might be
put into a central database.
  Mr Jackson said that there would be massive pressures for more and more
information to be stored, and it was naive to believe that the system would
be limited to its original purposes.
  The proposals had already moved well outside the tax area and the more
centralised information became and the more uses to which the Australia
Card was put, the more unease the Law Council would have.
  In response to a question, Mr Stewart said the Taxation Committee would
prefer to see an identifying number given to partnerships, trusts and other
entities. Whether this should be the tax file number would depend on
convenience and other factors.
  He said the Taxation Committee saw difficulties arising with the need
for production of the card or to have some means of verification, and the
extra steps that would be involved in real estate and other transactions.
On the analysis so far able to be made of the proposals, these difficulties
were not insurmountable.
  Mr Stewart said the body which controlled any identification system that
was introduced should have the full confidence of the public as to its ability
to maintain confidentiality. The Australian Taxation Office was held in
high regard in this respect.

 Law Council submission  

  In its written submission to the Joint Select Committee, the Law Council
said:
  The Law Council of Australia was represented at the 1985 Tax Summit and
there, along with many other participants, expressed qualified support for
the general idea of an identity card scheme for certain purposes. In his
address at the Summit, the then President of the Law Council, Mr Alan Cornell,
said:
   "While there is a case for ID cards for recipients of government pensions
   and other benefits, the ID card proposal for taxpayers is controversial.
   Some in the Law Council see it as a necessary measure in the fight against
   tax evasion. Others are concerned that it will be extended into other
   areas and bring on the era of Big Brother surveillance. The task of the
   Government is to convince the doubters that this will not happen. If the
   Government proceeds in this manner we would want the opportunity to study
   the proposals carefully and to suggest appropriate safeguards to protect
   the rights of citizens."
  The matter subsequently was considered in more detail by some constituent
bodies of the Law Council. The Law Society of New South Wales, the Queensland
Law Society, the Queensland Bar Association, and the Law Institute of Victoria
have made submissions directly to the Joint Select Committee. All opposed
the introduction of ID cards.
  The Queensland Law Society has prepared further comments in the light
of the Government's submission of 6 February 1986 to the Joint Select
Committee. The Society's comments are attached to this submission. The Society
points out that these comments were prepared under severe time constraints
and do not purport to cover all the matters of concern to it nor necessarily
to represent its final views.
  This submission takes into account the Commonwealth submission to the
Joint Select Committee, dated 6 February 1986, and the subsequent Health
Commission Planning Report. It reflects consideration of the Government's
proposals by the Law Council's Privacy Law Committee and the Taxation Committee
of the Council's Business Law Section.

 Introductory comments  

  It is important to note that the Commonwealth has not made definite
commitments on a number of important aspects and that various responses
given previously may therefore need to be reconsidered in light of changing
Government intentions. One example is the question whether a photograph
is to be attached to the card.
  It is also important to note that Commonwealth estimates of the cost of
setting up the scheme and the savings resulting therefrom have varied widely
over the period since the idea was first seriously mooted at the Tax Summit.
The Law Council of Australia is not in a position to challenge or affirm
any of those costings or estimates. The latest estimate of the cost of
establishing and operating the identification scheme has been reduced,
illustrating again the change in costings. Further criticism has been made
of the costings by Roger Clarke of the ANU on the basis that it does not
include the establishment and compliance costs for the private sector.
  Savings to revenue over costs are said to be something like $3.5 billion
over ten years. That is $350 million per year or about $20-$30 per annum
per head of population. The question clearly becomes: Is this saving worth
it, in view of the problems, uncertainties and civil liberty concerns involved
in the proposals?
  Further, the ID card scheme cannot be taken in isolation from two other
serious ongoing areas of debate.
(a) The question of implementation in some form or other of the Australian
    Law Reform Commission's report on Privacy. The Commonwealth has at a
    late stage decided to proceed with the establishment of a European-style
    Data Protection Agency with a substantial full-time Secretariat staff
    including in its membership the Privacy Commissioner of the proposed
    Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission. This is a substantial
    upgrading of the protection for privacy formerly proposed by the
    Australian Law Reform Commission in its Privacy Report and goes in
    a direction hitherto unknown in Australia. The Australian Law Reform
    Commission suggested that privacy at the Commonwealth level should
    primarily be protected by expansion of the role of the Human Rights
    Commission by creating within its structure a Privacy Commissioner (along
    the lines of the Race Relations Commissioner) and the legislative
    establishment of a complaints and educational role for the Human Rights
    Commission in that area and the promulgation of information privacy
    guidelines based on overseas (and particularly OECD) precedents. The
    Commonwealth apparently intends to proceed with the introduction of
    such legislation. However, details have not yet been made publicly
    available. The information privacy guidelines proposed by the ALRC
    were themselves a watered-down version of the OECD guidelines and if
    "gutted" by the Commonwealth bureaucracy may really come down to a
    meaningless level, leaving out all the crucial areas of concern to
    the bureaucracy.
(b) In addition, it should be noted that the Bill of Rights contains privacy
    protection provisions based on the International Covenant of Civil and
    Political Rights, but these are expressed in very general form and
    the Bill of Rights legislation itself has been criticised for not going
    far enough in various ways.

 Taxation uses  

  The Taxation Committee of the Law Council's Business Law Section is, and
has been since this issue was first raised in the pre-Summit Draft White
Paper, of the view that it is appropriate and reasonable that persons opening
bank accounts, purchasing shares or obtaining employment should be obliged
to quote their tax file number or some other identification number so that
the tax office can have a unique identifier of each individual and business
entity to assist in preventing fraud and evasion.
  The Committee is and always was of the view that there is no objection
to this unique personal identifier being in the form of a personal identity
card as long as adequate privacy safeguards existed. The Committee is not
in a position to express a view of what are adequate privacy safeguards
as that would be better done by experts in that area, but at least the
committee felt that the minimum safeguards would be:

(a) that each individual had ready access to the information held on file
    under this number and the ability to correct wrong information and the
    ability to have the issue considered by an independent tribunal if there
    was a dispute as to the correctness of information; and
(b) that each department had access only to information relevant to its
    own activities and subject to the secrecy provisions appropriate to
    that department, so that there did not exist in one place or able to
    be accessed by one person a total profile of an individual in respect
    of his relations with all government departments.
  The issue which caused the Committee the most difficulty was whether it
should object to any specific uses proposed by the Taxation Office,
particularly those which went beyond the uses earlier discussed in the Draft
White Paper and at the National Taxation Summit. However, the Committee
believes that each of the uses proposed in the Government submission would
be of positive and significant value to the Taxation Office in preventing
evasion either by direct use of the information in determining a taxpayer's
income or in selecting taxpayers for early field audit. Obviously, determined
criminals would get round the system but that would always be the same.
  For this reason, the final conclusion of the Taxation Committee, being
a view which was supported by a substantial majority of the Committee but
by no means unanimous, was that the Committee could not reasonably object
to the uses proposed by the Australian Taxation Office but that the extended
nature of those uses, and the substantial possibility that further uses
would be adopted in the future, made it even more essential that proper
privacy safeguards be strengthened.

