But who will sweep the streets?  Seeking the real emerging curriculum issues By Kevin Harris  

  The dominant body of theory which presently underpins research into
educational issues, teaching training, schooling practices, and which supplies
the rationale for the provision of universal compulsory schooling in the
first place is idealist theory which mystifies and misrepresents the role
of schooling within social relations and which creates tensions within
schooling by positing noble and worthwhile goals which are in fact
unrealisable. An analysis of the role of schooling in terms of production
relations rather than idealist theory reveals that the achievement of universal
liberal education within advanced corporate capitalist social relations
is mythical, and that the most likely tendency for the future will be to
offer less liberal education to fewer and fewer people. If societies are
to survive in which universal liberal education is truly possible (and in
which free educated citizens willingly carry out the necessary menial and
instrumental tasks) then a fundamental change in the economic base must
first be brought about.

 Introduction  

  In a recent paper Jim Christensen argued for a curriculum for freedom
as an appropriate alternative to school curricula designed to enhance pupils'
job prospects, insisting that we must come up with a viable alternative
to the latter, and that finding a suitable alternative is a serious
contemporary challenge for professional teachers. I agree with him in
principle. My immediate problem is that I would wish to take very strong
issue with just about everything else in his paper, which I see as being
misguided and misdirected mainly because of its basis in one naive
social-economic hope and a series of misunderstandings of the place of
schooling within social relations. One possible response, then, would be
to mount a direct criticism of Christensen here; but I have never liked
duelling in public, and so I shall choose a different response. Rather than
make negative points I shall put forward a positive case concerning many
of the same issues which Christensen has addressed: our analyses will not
touch at many points but they will meet on a central issue, and taken together
they may then form the basis for future constructive discussion rather than
the public blood-letting which too many academics are much too fond of.
But given the constraints of time and space I can at best outline my case
and give small supportive argument here: full discussion must be sought
elsewhere.

  My case is simply that educational practice, which includes curriculum
issues - not to mention our youth - has been very badly served for a long
time by an outmoded and inappropriate body of educational theory, and also
through failure to take necessary heed of a particularly valuable explanatory
account of the labour market, labour relations and production relations
- an account which demonstrates that universal liberating education cannot
be achieved without a fundamental change right at the very economic base
of social relations.

 The Inappropriate Body: Idealist Liberal Educational Theory  

  Educational practice - in its formal legal manifestation, schooling -
is underpinned by theory: educational theory. Teachers consume large doses
of it in their training period, they espouse it as practitioners and confront
it in guides to their work such as curriculum preambles; government departments
formulate their policy in terms of it; and all who have to do with education
in general are accountable to it. And the vast bulk, if not the whole of
this educational theory which researchers presently generate, and academics
presently teach, and teachers presently learn, and government departments
presently attempt to implement in schooling practice is what I shall call
idealist liberal educational theory. It is theory firmly rooted in Plato,
which has come down to us in a continuous line from him; and the roots are
most manifestly obvious in the works of those who held the first chairs
and lectureships when the monopoly on legitimate educational theory shifted
to universities and advanced colleges about a century ago, and who so set
the tone for modern contemporary studies.    

  But just as Renaissance scholars had to reconcile Platonism with
Christianity, so the Victorian Platonist dons had their particular
reconciliation to do too. Plato's social and educational theory was unashamedly
elitist. However, more recently transmitted from the past were theories
(rooted in changing material practices) of equality, egalitarianism,
liberalism, and the `Romantic' belief in the worth of every individual person,
which those such as Voltaire, the French Revolutionaries, Rousseau, von
Humbolt and Mill had given expression to. Alongside this, industrial capitalism
had brought about the great migration to the industrial and commercial cities,
as well as the need, of which more will be said later, to school everybody.
Thus the major problem confronting educational theory, as practised by its
first academic professionals, was that of reconciling Platonic idealist
elitism with liberal egalitarianism; and the legitimate educational theory
which has since emerged as dominant is that which, while attending to the
empirical data generated by the social sciences as well as such key concepts
as `equality', `autonomy', `individual development', `enlightened citizenship'
and `democracy' along the way, has unsuccessfully continued to address itself
to this task. Sad though it might be, (and this does relate to the
street-sweeper problem) we have been riding a loser for a long time now.
Why it is a loser will become evident as this paper progresses; here let
me spell out first why I categorise the theory in question as `idealist'.

  Basically, dominant educational theory is idealist in that it denies,
ignores, misconceptualises, and renders unproblematic certain important
factors about the real world of daily experience and practice. More
specifically: 

  a) it assumes, either explicitly or implicitly, an atomistic stance to
social relations, and thus adopts a theoretic context which regards teachers
as free, autonomous, individual agents and consequently describes teacher
practice within the terms of such a context. An emphasis falls on what the
(independent, autonomous) individual teacher can or might do for individual
pupils, and then through dubious extrapolation closely resembling the
committing of a category error, on the gains and transformations which are
hoped for from the accumulative effect of large numbers of (independent,
autonomous) individual teachers interacting with larger numbers of less
independent and less autonomous but similarly individual pupils. The theory
thus appeals to the aspirations and capabilities of teachers as individuals,
and teachers are, of course, individuals in one sense (a sting in the tail
is that it also attributes blame for failure to teachers as individuals),
but it fails to account adequately, if at all, for the non-atomised social
constraints which stand between the teacher-as-individual (and the pupil-as-
individual) and the fulfilment of the prescribed ideals

  b) it conflates schooling with `education'. That is, a public concrete
institution is confused and conflated with an abstracted ideal in much the
same way, as Illich has noted, that hospitals and `health' and the police
force and `law and order' have similarly become conflated. Now this is not
to deny that schooling has something to do with `education', but the nexus
is a tenuous one and anything but the essentialist association which the
once revered philosopher, R.S. Peters (in a direct line from Matthew Arnold)
so commonly proclaims. Schooling, as we shall see, has much more to do with
things other than `education'; and the nexus which has been consistently
woven between the two thus falsely represents schooling to its agents (the
teachers), its charges (the pupilis), and to its providers and beneficiaries.
Theory which declares that the main business of schooling is `education',
or simply blurs the distinction between the two, mystifies the function
of schooling within social relations, and at the day-to-day level presents
teachers with fine ideals, noble hopes, admirable aspirations, and large-scale
failure when it comes to the attempted realisation of these things in practice
(which does not mean that no teacher ever assists in the `education' of
some pupils).   

  c) it concentrates quite centrally on notions such as `democracy',
`equality', and `personal autonomy', suggesting also in unproblematic fashion
that the social formations in, to and for which the theory is meant to apply
are democratic and egalitarian (or at the least are moving strongly in those
directions), and that they are seriously desirous of promoting the type
of personal autonomy spoken of among all. Now administrators, academics
and teachers might believe in promoting democracy, equality, and personal
autonomy, and strive as hard as they can towards these ends; but if in reality
they are working within social relations which are quite undemocratic, based
firmly on inequality, and threatened by too much personal autonomy, then
clearly these people, and especially the teachers, must continually encounter
restraints between what they are striving for and what they are able to
achieve, or experience conflict between the theory which guides their practice
and the actual outcomes of their practice - and conflict which, in the long
run, is not adequately accounted for by the theory itself.      

  d) it exhorts moral and intellectual prescriptions which, although possibly
applicable to the best of all possible worlds, tend to emerge as somewhat
empty rhetoric in the present historical conjuncture. It would be very
nice if schooling helped all pupils `achieve the highest degree of individual
development of which they are capable', led pupils as deep as philosophy
and as high as art, or, to be a little less grandiose-sounding, developed
the spirit of fraternity among all, encouraged cooperation, and promoted
equality and justice. Concerns and ideals such as these, flowing freely
from dominant educational theory, are a common basis of general
teacher-endeavour which is surely directed towards `stemming the common
tide in a wealthy and industrial community'. They are, however, very difficult
concerns and ideals to fulfil in non-cooperative, unfraternal, unequal,
unjust wealthy and industrial communities which in reality cannot afford
(both literally and figuratively) to stem the common tide, and in which
someone has to sweep those infernal streets. 

  e)  it accounts for failure to achieve its own ends, predictably, in idealist
terms; most commonly falling back on human nature (people are naturally
lazy, greedy, evil etc.), and/or a naive a-historical account of `the way
things are' and how they got to be that way which distorts and misrepresents
causal relations, takes existing conditions as `given' rather than brought
about, and most importantly fails to recognise that `existing conditions'
are actively maintained, reproduced and recreated in the present. In this
way actual existing dynamic problems are confused with causal factors, and
can thus be identified, and dismissed, as causes which have brought about
the problems that we now face rather than as the problems themselves. An
interesting example of such argumentation, combined with a retreat to human
nature, is provided by the afore-mentioned R.S. Peters:  

     In all social movements, whether they be religious, political or cultural
     [does this include, and if not can we add, `educational'?], there is
     always the problem of the majority who do not care... The explanation
     of this familiar phenomenon, as well as the inefficacy of advocacy
     [and `education' or schooling?], is not far to seek. The majority of
     men are geared to consumption and see the value of anything in terms
     of immediate pleasures or as related instrumentally to the satisfaction
     of their wants as consumers. 

And therein lies all the consolation necessary for anyone seriously
endeavouring to put idealist educational theory into practice but somehow
just not getting the results.

  f) finally, although not exhaustively, it either denies or is largely
oblivious to the matter of production relations and the effects of production
relations on all aspects of material practice; including, of course, schooling.
And having noted this it would be wise, therefore, if we ourselves now gave
ample consideration to production relations before returning eventually
to the general problem of producing adequate educational theory and the
specific worry as to who will sweep the streets.

 Production Relations and Education: Reality and Possibility   

  It was noted in the previous section that one of the legacies or effects
of idealist liberal education theory is that the assumed connection between
schooling and `education' is almost universally taken for granted.

