<sample>
	<id> J50 </id>
	


	<note> 2009 words </note>
	


	<source> Education and Society - 1986 </source>
	


	<h> The control of schooling </h>
	


	<bl> By F.J. Hunt </bl>
	


	<h> Interests, Protagonists and the Control of Schooling </h>
	

  The control of schooling is commonly examined in terms of the structures
through which control is exercised, with attention given to ministries or
departments and their divisions or sections, and possibly to associated
or complementary agencies such as examination of curriculum bodies (Partridge,
1973; Salter &amp; Tapper, 1981; Wirt &amp; Kirst, 1982). Attention has also been
given to their ideological character, recognising the influence of capitalism
or some other prevailing modus operandi, and their rationalisations or
ideologies for operating a society (Bowles &amp; Gintis, 1976; Sharp, 1980;
Apple, 1982). But typically the resultant interpretation is in impersonal
structuralist terms, with people and groups portrayed as passive or at most
mechanistically reactive. A major problem with such approaches is that in
neglecting or minimising the dynamic activities of people they yield
interpretations that are seriously inadequate both for developing understanding
and as a basis for effective action.
  To direct attention to the activities of people, acting as individuals
or in groups, is to recognise that they are dynamic and active in the pursuit
of personal and social concerns - or interests, to adapt a well established
conceptualisation (e.g. Plamenatz, 1964; Gideens, 1979:ch.5). Such an approach
not only recognises conventional conceptions of shared concerns but it also
accommodates conceptions of inherent thrusts to develop, whether to develop
identity and move through successive psychological stages as argued by Erikson
(1965), achieve self realisation and fulfilment as argued by Maslow (1968)
and Rogers (1969), or competence, autonomy and independence as White (1959)
argued or, in the terms used by Weber (1964:180-95), undertake a process
of aggrandisement and raise one's status, wealth and authority. Thus the
term can be used to include personal and social, inherent and acquired,
subjective and objective, and a wide range of other concerns. In addition,
while subjective preferences are fundamental in the selection of objectives
and in formulating courses of action, identified forms and patterns of
development provide basis for objective appraisals of the reality of
development and achievement. And while it may seem that the term is used
to identify too wide a range of phenomena, it is valuable because it identifies
a common element in that diversity, namely, a stimulus for developmental
individual and group activities. 
  It is also evident that the concept of interest is not adequate by itself;
necessary too are power and, I would add, justice. Power, meaning a capacity
to achieve personal and social ends, even if to do so is at a cost to other
people, and justice, meaning a concern for the entitlements of others, and
so restraint in the pursuit of personal or social ends out of consideration
for others, are both essential to an understanding of social activities
and arrangements. For example, interest together with power may account
for important similarities between social structures and also for their
stability over time, despite efforts to change them. Conversely, variations
in a sense of justice may account for important differences between them.
  As a consequence of differences in power, the pursuit of such interests
by some can generate rivalry and conflict in struggles over limited resources
and opportunities, and incidentally, limit development, achievement and
aggrandisement for others. Hence emerge, too, particular forms of social
arrangements, including coalitions with common or shared interests and,
again following Weber (1964:155-91), structures of domination, direction
and exploitation. Presumably, too, such structures persist while they serve
the interests of more powerful individuals and groups. Concurrently, they
incidentally constitute the social reality to which less powerful people
accommodate.
  Such developments can be modified by a change either in the distribution
of power or in the operation of a sense of justice. It is the exercise of
a sense of justice that can moderate demands that would otherwise leave
the less powerful in more parlous circumstances.
  Obviously, difficulties involved in teasing out degrees of power and justice
operating in particular situations are considerable. In the first place,
difficulties of conceptualisation or identification leave unclear what is
meant by those concepts. Even so, there is a greater degree of agreement
in respect of power, with Lukes (1974) offering a recent advance by identifying
a third dimension. In contrast, disagreements about justice can be at the
fundamental level of relative entitlements: some who regard particular
individuals or groups as inherently unequal see a corresponding unequal
distribution of rights and obligations as just; conversely, others see the
same people as basically equal and so see such inequalities as unjust. Here
the issue is refocussed by according all people comparable rights to develop,
achieve their potentialities, and experience fulfilment and satisfaction.
Such a position incidentally requires that the observer-interpreter be
impartial as between people in attentiveness to opportunities and obstacles
for all to develop and achieve. It is also a position that is quite difficult
to uphold because it disregards power as a factor in establishing claims
for rights and opportunities.
  A further problem of considerable significance in the examination of
individuals and groups is the gathering of data about them. Any one group
justifies extensive study, and a discussin such as this is the better informed
to the extent that it draws upon such studies; unfortunately, however, they
are few. Further, people and groups that seek to exercise influence are
not always readily visible: indeed, some, and particularly the more powerful,
are sometimes both concerned to limit their observability and effective
in doing so. Nonetheless, effects of decisions and policies eventually have
an influence, and although working back from impact introduces a time lag
between formulation and examination, it still enables examination and
interpretation to be undertaken. Again, the present is a particularly
propitious time to study education in that changing and even worsening
circumstances have challenged individuals and groups to act more vigorously
and often more publicly to maintain or even continue to enhance their
achievements and circumstances, so that they have been more observable and
therefore more amenable to analysis and interpretation. Here, problems of
data gathering have been met by undertaking a wide ranging study of documents
and other material, including media sources, supplemented with interviews
with spokespeople of organisations at both state and national levels. Finally,
some degree of validation has been achieved by using opportunities to formulate
interpretations and test them against the interpretations of other observers,
including participants in the ongoing social activities. Ultimately, of
course, examining and interpreting the contemporary, dynamically evolving
scene can have neither certainty nor conclusiveness. Even so, it is an
important task to undertake if understanding and action are to be reasonably
adequate and soundly based.
  In essence, then, this discussion constitutes an attempt to examine the
significance of interest groups in educational activity, using Australia
as an illustrative case. A focus on the pursuit of interests by groups with
differential power highlights processes and relationships such as conflict,
dominance and subjection, and suggests the relevance of the conflict position
elaborated by Collins (1971, 1975). In giving significance to the operation
of a sense of justice in social activity, however, the possibility is raised
of a necessity to modify such a position in order to deal with the practice
of compassion and social concern.


	<h> Interests and protagonists </h>
	

  To consider interests and the protagonists who pursue them in respect
of schooling is to consider a diverse array of groups related in a variety
of ways to the operation of schooling. For example, not all operate from
outside; some, such as teachers and administrators are fully employed within
the structures. Nor are all relevant groups organised, articulate and able
to express coherent points of view; such a level of operation is usually
beyond students, for example, whose interests are served by default, to
a degree, by parents, teachers, researchers and administrators. Nor is to
be organised and articulate necessarily indicative of common interests:
any group such as teachers, parents or employers combine sub-groups with
different interests that compete so that there is rivalry and even conflict
within an overall group. Nor is it possible here to be authoritative on
the interest groups operating in relation to schooling; rather, such is
the relative invisibility of some, and the absence of research on them,
that they can be little more than identified and discussed from general
observations. Nevertheless, in a survey such as this it is important to
at least identify and raise questions about them.
  The first group, then, is the children who attend schools. Although the
largest group associated with schooling, they rarely achieve an association
to represent their interests, partly because they are organisationally
inadequate and unsophisticated, partly because they are more transient in
the school situation than others such as teachers and administrators, but
largely because they lack the resources and facilities for sustaining a
formal association to act on their behalf. In addition, students' shared
interests can be very general and particular ones most diverse, so that
a single association would have considerable difficulty in developing consensus
around policies on many issues. Significantly, student associations have
only been sustained at the tertiary level.
  Ironically, however, children are not without protagonists ready to act
or speak in their name. For example, in debates on educational issues such
as school funding, curriculum or school organisation, governance or assessment,
proponents of very different positions often argue their positions as being
`in the best interests of the child' or on the basis of children's rights.
Again, the Victorian Institute of Secondary Education (VISE,1978:3-4) claimed
that it is to offer assistance to youth moving between secondary schooling
and employment or further study, but it is difficult to perceive how it
serves children who are sorted `out' rather than `in', or how it is primarily
helping children when its main task is to produce performance profiles of
children for selectors, and offers nothing to children by way of profiles
of places of work or further study. Still, again, administrators and teachers
purport to have children's interests foremost while nonetheless preoccupied
with running schools as places of order (e.g. Williams, 1981). Employers
likewise express concern but of a kind that would have children shaped more
appropriately to their employment requirements (Senate Standing Committee,
1981:3-10).
  Researchers have come but lately to catch children's experiences, perceptions
and interpretations, and show schooling from their viewpoints (Campbell,
1976; Norman, 1980; Collins &amp; Hughes, 1982). One point that is clear,
particularly from research done in other societies (Willis, 1977; Woods,
1983), is that children can exercise some influence within the classroom
and the school, although `troublemakers' can be isolated and manoeuvred
out of schooling. However, in respect of any system beyond the school, children
are weak and vulnerable as a social force, and largely dependent on the
concern of others such as parents, teachers, administrators and researchers.
  An essential point is that in Australia, as elsewhere, the interests of
children are real but not well articulated. That situation reflects their
relative ineffectiveness politically and, in that circumstance, the interests
of others are promoted energetically, and commonly have priority.
  Parents constitute a second group who, given the prevailing modus operandi
of schooling, can reasonably be argued to be its clients. At the same time,
parents' interests are not necessarily the same as those of their children.
Hence, while able to interpret and act on their behalf, parents do not have
a basis for claiming absolute authority to decide what is best for them.
In addition, the activities of some parents on behalf of their own children
can have consequences that are detrimental to the best interests of other
children, as will be illustrated presently.
  A particular concern of many public school parents has been to gain greater
influence in the operation of schools and some state education departments
have responded with changes in the composition of school councils to enable
parents to elect representatives (e.g. Fitzgerald &amp; Pettit, 1978; Minister
of Education, 1983). However, changes in styles of participation can take
time to develop when parents have been virtually excluded from active and
influential participation in schools since the state systems were established
in the late nineteenth century.


</sample>
