<sample>
	<id> J51 </id>
	


	<note> 2015 words </note>
	


	<source> The ends of philosophy: an essay in the sociology of philosophy and rationality  </source>
	


	<bl> By Harry Redner </bl>
	


	<h> The Second Secession </h>
	

The second secession of the sciences from philosophy resulted from those 
transformations that ushered in the second phase of classical science. 
Decisive changes took place in the natural sciences which made them 
further removed from the previous epistemological metaphysics: physics 
moved towards greater mathematisation and abstraction; mathematics, too, 
developed the abstractions of non-Euclidian geometry and symbolic logic; 
chemistry became atomic and biology cellular. Of even greater importance 
for philosophy were, however, the new sciences of life, history, society, 
culture, or in short the sciences of evolution and Man. All this brought 
about the beginning of the end of metaphysics, or at least its 
transformation into a form which no longer had any direct relation
to traditional First Philosophy. And, simultaneously, it brought about a
transformation of Rationalism from its classical to its progressivist mode.
  Progressivist Rationalism is inherent in the post-Enlightenment ideal of 
rational Progress. Rationality is viewed in terms of one or another of the 
concepts of Progress, be it development, evolution, concrete realisation, 
or the stages of history or production. Progress is seen as inherently 
rational, and rationality is seen as the outcome of Progress; the one 
defines the other: Progress is the realised movement of rationality, and 
rationality is what is unfolded in the course of Progress. Thus the 
progressive unfolding of the stages of development of anything is always 
judged to be a rational sequence which, though not necessarily teleological, 
does move toward some goal or fulfilment. Rationality is inherent not so much 
in any ultimate culminating telos or end, as it would be in metaphysical
thought, but in the very process of self-development, which is held to be 
governed by rational law. Rationality thus becomes subject to temporality; 
it is no longer manifest all at once, all there in the one ever-present order 
or structure; rather it presents itself successively over time through the 
propulsion of a creative Deed of ordering and structuring. It no longer 
simply `is', it `becomes': becoming, not being, is its quasi-metaphysical 
subject.
  It is sociologically apparent why this should have meant an end to
traditional metaphysics. Progressive Rationalism negated every fixed order 
so that no unity of being could maintain itself in the face of universal 
development and change. The earlier epistemological Rationalism still 
maintained, though in a greatly altered form, all the old metaphysical 
principles of Being, God, Nature, Human Nature, Essence and Truth. With the 
onset of Progressive Rationalism, all these were set in motion - first subjected 
to continual transformation, then finally abandoned. Being became Becoming, 
God became Progress or History, Nature became raw material for human activity, 
Human Nature became Man the chief active agent, fixed Essence was abandoned in 
favour of existence and Truth was relativised in terms of sequential stages.
  According to Marx, this intellectual revolutionising process was brought about 
by the material revolutionary inroads of capitalism and carried through by 
the bourgeoisie:

  Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all 
  social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the 
  bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, 
  with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are 
  swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify.
  All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and man 
  is at last compelled to face with sober senses, his real conditions of 
  life, and his relations with his kind.

Among the ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions that were thus swept 
away, metaphysics would hold a prominent place. But the belief that such a 
clean sweep would force man to face with sober senses his real conditions of 
life rests on an historical empiricism that is no longer credible. We have
learned to read the critique of ideology as itself an ideology. Marx's 
Progressivist Rationality is by no means the sober truth of historical reason.
  Despite evident differences, Progressivist Rationality is a mode of 
Rationalism; for even though it is rationality temporalised, it is as 
law-governed, ordered and inherent in things or processes themselves as the 
earlier classical Rationalism. It is also method-bound and analytic; and 
though no longer simply presenting tabular analyses outlining a structural 
order, it is itself, nevertheless, given to tracing regular sequences of 
development and drawing up tables of stages. The new Rationalism is also 
self-reflexive and critical, like the earlier. The laws of Progress function 
as the rational standards by which everything traditional may be criticised, 
as did the laws of Nature earlier. The very same laws apply self-critically 
to the thought or science that discovers them, so that all new knowledge is 
viewed as the rational culmination at once of Progress and of
self-consciousness. This self-conscious philosophic conception of Progressivist 
Rationalism was first elaborated `idealistically' by Hegel, but it was 
eventually interpreted `materialistically' and much more scientistically by 
Marx and even Comte.
  Under the intellectual aegis of Progressivist Rationalism, there took place 
that disciplinary separation and definition of most of our sciences which we 
have called the second secession of science from philosophy. It was mainly 
carried through within the new German university system, which began with the 
foundation of Berlin University around 1806. At first it meant a greatly 
expanded role for philosophy, which temporarily became encyclopaedic, but the 
eventual outcome as one after another of the sciences broke away was the 
reduction of philosophy to the status of merely one among many other academic 
disciplines. As Ben-David and Zloczower see it, 'the German university system 
provided the basis for the great development of philosophy as a systematic 
discipline. But contrary to the intention of the philosophers, the university
system made philosophy into just one of the academic disciplines, and added 
to it a great many new ones'. These authors go on to explain the sociological 
processes by which philosophy first expanded and then contracted as it was 
broken down into specialised disciplines, all of which were at first `closely 
connected with the ideological bias of German philosophy'. That philosophy was 
predominantly Idealism.
  Thus, in its opening phase it was not at all apparent that the second 
secession of the sciences from philosophy would also signal the end of 
metaphysics. On the contrary, it seemed as if Idealism meant the revival 
of metaphysics and speculative reason despite the earlier restrictions imposed 
by Kantian Critical Philosophy. The Idealist Naturphilosophie culminating
in Hegel's Encyclopaedia was taken as indicative of the recovery of the hold 
of metaphysics over the sciences - an attempt at the comprehension and 
unification of all the sciences such as had not been seen since Aristotle. 
As we now know, all this proved short-lived and chimerical . Hegelian
Idealism collapsed - though it did not disappear for reasons we shall explore 
later - and metaphysics was under attack as never before. The new varieties 
of sciences, above all the historical sciences of Man together with new 
evolutionary sciences of Time, were in the process of breaking away from 
philosophy and they eventually excluded metaphysics completely from any 
hold on reality. They did so precisely by occupying the intellectual space 
that had previously enabled Rationalist metaphysics to function: the 
epistemological ground of knowledge, method and rationality. This ground now 
became the province of the new sciences of the mind, logic, language, culture 
and society. It was precisely the field of epistemology, the locus of 
classical Rationalism, that was subjected to a new scientific understanding.
  Empiricism and Rationalism in philosophy were no longer needed. The formation 
of ideas was to be explained from now on purely scientifically by the new 
science of psychology. This at first took a purely mechanistic guise in 
Associationism, as in the work of Thomas Brown and Dougal Stewart 
(1804), but very soon became Phenomenological in the work of Goethe, and 
eventually spread over every area of human mind, including the unconscious. 
Its challenge to philosophy became total with the appearance of Fechner's 
`Psycho-physics' (1860), `which seemed to hold out the prospect of introducing 
into philosophical discussion the definiteness and methodical treatment which 
had done so much for the natural sciences'. A similar challenge to any 
metaphysics of ideas was posed by another presumptive science, that of 
Ideologie as founded by Destutt de Tracy (1804). This `science', castigated 
by Napoleon as the work of mere `ideologues', had little success until it 
transformed itself into ideological critique as part of Marx's science of
historical materialism, itself established on the basis of a criticism of 
the new science of `classical' economics founded earlier by Smith and 
Ricardo. The social formation of ideas was also the subject of the new science 
of sociology founded by Comte. The almost simultaneous foundation of symbolic 
logic by Boole, computation by Babbage and the non-Euclidean geometries
by the pupils of Gauss had an equally decisive effect on all Rationalist 
metaphysics of deductive reasoning from indubitable axioms and of intuited 
laws of thought.
  But perhaps the innovations most destructive of every metaphysical 
epistemology were those of the new cultural sciences (Geisteswissenschaften), 
developed largely in Germany. By the early eighteenth century Vico had 
prefigured a thorough critique of the Rationalism of Descartes and the 
Empiricism of Hobbes by means of a cultural theory of language and the
historical development of knowledge. Knowledge derived neither from abstract 
reason nor sensory experience, neither from intuited truths nor constituted 
ideas, but from the slow historical growth of cultural forms, above all, of 
modes of language. Vico's views were taken up by Goethe (who discovered
his work in Naples on his first Italian journey) and also by Herder and Hamann, 
none of whom ever fully realised or acknowledged their debt to him. Together 
they laid the basis for most of our cultural sciences: from comparative 
literature to folklore, from philology to the history of knowledge, from
cultural anthropology to a theory of world-history.
  The emergence of philology alone had manifold consequences for philosophy,
and perhaps the first man fully to grasp this was Goethe's friend Humboldt.
(We shall see how his folkish view of language as the primary communal
expression of a people, with its anti-individualist bias, anticipated
Wittgenstein's so-called private-language argument against the Cogito.)
Humboldt decisively rejected the classical Rationalist view of language
as a set of signs whose function it was to represent ideas through an
arbitrarily established relation of association - a view which his
contemporary, Hegel, still held and which de Saussure was partly to revive
in the context of a new systemic linguistics. He propounded instead a theory
of the word as an expressive element within a language seen as an organic
whole charged with `energeia'. This Aristotelian notion, which he acquired
through Leibniz and endowed with his own `activist' meaning, reveals lingering
shades of metaphysics. Thus, activity, or the Deed, became explicitly the
foundation of language, and so implicitly also of all meaning and reality,
something which no philosopher at the time had yet formulated. To Humboldt
and the other key figures of Berlin University, philology meant much more
than the study of language in the sense that contemporary linguistics now
propounds. Philology was for them the basic form of all humanistic scholarship;
in his history of this period Merz makes apparent the importance of philology
as the focus for scholarship throughout the German university system, a
role that it has scarcely lost in Germany even today. Hermeneutics has
continued to be its basic philosophical quasi-epistemology; from Schleirmacher,
a contemporary of Humboldt at Berlin, it was passed on to Dilthey, who first
formulated it as a `method'; from there it was taken up by Heidegger, and
it is even now being continued by Gadamer, Ricoeur and even Habermas.
Nietzsche, too, was trained in classical philology and its hermeneutic
techniques and he taught rhetoric at Basel, all of which is clearly reflected
in his first philosophic work, The Origin of Tragedy. Many of his later
philosophic moves are strictly speaking philological: for example his
questionable use of changing word-usage for evidence of the master-slave
morality distinction, his more substantial linguistic critique of moral
values, and also his suggestive remarks on the relationship between the
philosophical categories and grammar, which we shall examine critically
later.  
  

</sample>
