Towards a new theology of transcendence By Ronald S. Laura  

     In recent years it has become fashionable to suppose that
the conflict between religion and science is more apparent than
real. It has, for example, been argued by Max Charlesworth that
there is no conflict between Christianity and science, only a
conflict between a "certain fundamentalist form of Christianity
and a certain philosophical theory about science".
Charlesworth's suggestion is that the Christian scriptures
about God and the world do not admit of literal interpretation
and similarly, that the theory of science cannot legitimately
be positivistically construed. Once the forms of Christianity
and science are thus recast less parsimoniously, the tension
between religion and science is deemed to vanish. There is, I
admit, a strong temptation to reduce the conflict between
religion and science to the terms of dispute so persuasively
enunciated by Charlesworth, but I am bound, nonetheless, to
urge that it is a temptation to be resisted. There is, of
course, a truth in Charlesworth's formulation of the problem,
but it is not the truth upon which the resolution of the
relation between religion and science turns.
     The demythologization of Christianity has its limits, just
as the de-positivisation of science has its limits. I thus
incline to the view that there is a deeper level of tension
between religion and science than we have discerned, and that
it shows itself in the limits of religion and science, not in
the forms of which the limits feature simply as one expression.
We can demythologize Christian scripture, but we cannot
demythologize the doctrine of God's transcendence which
underpins it without destroying the essence of Christianity
itself. It is either a literal truth that God exists or it is
not, and transcendence is the mode of God's existence.
     Science is similarly delimited by the constitutive
concepts which served to characterize it. Positivism is
admittedly one and not the only form which science can take,
but it is the essence of science that it cannot take just any
form. The constitutive concepts of science preserve not
positivism but an empiricist methodology by way of which the
world is known through the quantification of its parts and the
mensuration of their relations to each other. What there is,
even in the framework of a science demythologized of
positivism, reduces to what is quantifiable and mensurable. The
degree of latitude in the methodology is a matter simply of the
variety of ways in which it is possible to quantify and to
measure. In this sense, the tension between the nature of
belief in the God of Christianity and the logical character of
science is fundamental. The problem of God's transcendence is,
I submit, the recalcitrant problem which gives rise to the
conflict between religion and science, more real, I should say,
than apparent.
     In the remainder of this piece I shall be concerned to
adumbrate a new theology of transcendence. My aim is to provide
a tolerably coherent account of a possible interpretation of
God's transcendence which neither exaggerates nor underplays
the pressure which science places on religious belief. The
theological disposition has regrettably, I believe, been to
capitulate to science. The more science is alleged to explain
of the universe the further we have let God be driven from it.
The concept of God's transcendence of the universe has almost
become an euphemism for his absence from it. Let us see if we
cannot now redress the balance.
     Before the advent of modern science the concept of
transcendence derived a certain sense from the idea of the
universe as a spatially limited system. The finiteness of the
world enhanced the infinitude of God. If the world were
limitable, then the transcendence of God put him beyond its
limits. It was Giordano Bruno, however, who in the sixteenth
century challenged the concept of the universe as a spatially
closed system. Following Copernicus, he affirmed the belief
that the earth and planets revolve in orbits around the sun,
but extended the view by postulating an infinite space with no
fixed centre in which stars are independent suns, moving like
our universe, through unending space. By expanding space to
infinity, Bruno coincidentally robbed the word `beyond'. of its
meaning, for the world was no longer finite space. Bruno had
unwittingly challenged God's own territorial imperative in the
theology of the times, and he paid dearly for his heresy, as
it was then viewed, by being burnt at the stake in the year
1600. Since the time of Bruno, the concept of transcendence
has become progressively more recondite as science has
pushed back the frontiers of the universe ever further.
     I have elsewhere argued that it is a mistake to reject
religious belief in the name of science, for the
affirmation of scientific belief rests ultimately upon
faith. It is no part of my purpose to rehearse that
argument here, but one of its aspects is pertinent to the
present consideration. Certain beliefs are what I have
called `epistemically primitive' in respect of the
enterprize of science. An obvious example of the sort of
belief I have in mind is the tacit assumption, underpinning
all science, that the future resembles the past. If a
scientist did not believe that the future resembled the
past, there would be no point in carrying out experiments,
as one would have no way of connecting the results of one
experiment with the results of another. That the future
resembles the past is not itself, however, a belief that
can be established by experiment, for it is a constitutive
belief or experimentation. That the future resembles the
past is a pre-condition, that is to say, of experimentation
and thus cannot itself without vicious circularity be
incorporated as its result. Inasmuch as this belief
characterizes the way in which we test, by asserting the
conditions under which testing becomes intelligible, it is
what science must exempt for specific tests of science to
be intelligible.
     There is a mordant irony in the fact that though the
belief that the future resembles the past figures within
science as epistemically primitive, the concepts of
`future' and `past' are not themselves pellucid. Equally
ironic is the realization that the whole concept of space-
time to which tensed predicates such as future and past are
wedded would itself appear to be fraught with difficulties.
The problematic nature of the space-time manifold becomes
theologically interesting when we are reminded that it is
the spatio-temporal boundaries in respect of which God's
transcendence is postulated. If there is conceptual
confusion or incoherence in the articulation of these
boundaries, as I suggest there is, the theological
disquisition could well benefit from their discovery. Given
that the spatio-temporal demarcation of the world in
scientific terms has proved inimical to the theistic
affirmation, it would thus seem imperative to link the
analysis of divine transcendence with the analysis of the
confusions attendant upon space-time categories. This is
what I now propose to do.
     Part of the difficulty in getting clear about the
concepts of space and time is that we implicitly enjoin
spatial metaphors in the elucidation of time while
explicitly denying temporal metaphors in the elucidation
of space. Indeed, in solid geometry three-dimensional space
is represented as timeless and all verbs as tenseless. Yet
our ordinary discourse about time betrays a closer relation
between space and time than one might at first suspect. Our
metaphors for time reflect spatial references. We speak,
for example, of time as a river in which events flow past
us, like seasons which come and go, sweeping away the
present moment into the ever more distant past. The passage
of time metaphor creates the impression of time as a
kinetic continuum. The focal points of time are events, and
events possess the kinetic quality being future, present,
and past, for they have not yet happened, are currently
happening or have already happened. Events are ordered in
time, in other words, by conceptualising time as a sequence
of events whose position in the sequence is constantly
changing. As the old adage would have it, `Time waits for
no one'.
     To complicate matters further, time predicates are
`token reflexive' or `indexical', being self-referential
in respect of their utterance. While their connotation is
fixed their denotation is constantly changing. Where one
stands in the river of time (yet another spatial metaphor)
will determine one's temporal relation to the specific
event, whether it is past, present, or future or all three
at the same time for different people in different times.
The fall of the Roman Empire was for Caesar a future event,
though it is for us a past event. When one considers that
the `things' of which events are constituted are in
ontological terms, `enduring substances', the paradox of
the permanence in change becomes unavoidable.
     Since the same event is at different times future,
present and past, we may feel there is less of a problem
in the ascription of three incompatible temporal properties
to it. After all, we do not ascribe temporal simpliciter; our temporal predicates are
attributed by reference to a particular time. So at time
`t' the event is future and at time `t2' it is past and so
on. In this sense we could employ dates to characterize the
river of time much in the same way in which we use
longitude and latitudinal coordinates to locate places on
the globe. In so doing, however, we have strengthened the
spatial metaphor of time, for dates are now made to
function as cartographical references on the river of time,
measuring the distance between one event and another in
terms of duration. Two peculiar difficulties emerge. The
first relates to how time can be measured. Time flow
entails motion through time, whereas time is what we use
to measure motion through space. We talk, for example, of
moving from point X to Y at so many metres per second. If
we now shift the example to movement through time, we shift
from metres per second to measuring the flow of time in
terms of seconds per what? What we are deprived of is
precisely the fixed frame of temporal reference against
which the flow of time could be measured.
     There is, of course, another difficulty even less
tractable than the first. We have tried to avoid the
paradox of ascribing three incompatible temporal
properties, i.e. future, present, past, to the same event
by specifying the uniqueness of time of the ascription in
respect of the event. Unfortunately, the general theory of
relativity shows that there is no unique moment of
individuation to which we can appeal to achieve this, for
it turns out that simultaneity is itself relative. There
is no specific time that could be nominated unambiguously
as the present moment, since any two spatially distinct
events can - relative to the movement of any two observers
- be contemporaneous to one and yet sequential to the
other. As Davies has aptly put it:

Indeed, even the temporal order of such events is relative.
It is therefore meaningless to wonder what is happening
`now' on the quasar 3C273, because if the reader stands up
and walks about, his minor change of motion will have
shifted the moment of simultaneity on that distant
astronomical object by some thousands of years. Similarly,
distant aliens are disagreeing about whether 1979 on Earth
is past or future according to whether they are sedentary
or strolling!

     Our inquiry thus far has been intended to show that
while contemporary science presupposes a four-dimensional
space-time manifold, with three dimensions of space and one
of time, there are serious difficulties inherent in its
analysis. I have also intimated earlier that the issue of
God's transcendence is not unrelated to the way in which
science has relied upon its spatio-temporal model as
ontologically delimiting. Having prepared the ground, the
time has come to plant the conceptual crop, in the hope
that we will yet have time for the harvest.
     The thesis I shall propose is as follows.

