Site history and conservation analyses Ed. by Tony Lee  

  The redevelopment of the library and museum will involve the existing
library/museum and Queen Victoria Medical Centre sites. To ensure that the
historic, architectural and cultural significance of these sites will be
maintained, conservation analyses were commissined by the Public Works
Department in June 1985. In addition, existing conditions surveys were
undertaken either as part of these reports or previous surveys. 
  An initial report on the existing library/museum complex, which included
a detailed existing conditions report on the structure and services, had
been prepared by Peter Staughton. The 1985 library/museum study was undertaken
by Allom Lovell Sanderson Pty Ltd in association with the PWD; Allom Lovell
Sanderson had primary responsibility for the report preparation with the
PWD providing additional resources. Major components of the complex already
protected by the provision of the Government Buildings Register include
the Swanston Street wing, reading room and stairwell.
  The 1985 Queen Victoria Medical Centre report was prepared by Nigel Lewis
and Associates; it followed a preliminary report prepared by the same firm
in 1983 for the then Ministry for Planning. Later in 1983 the protective
provisions of the Government Building Register were extended to include
B, C, D, E and F blocks, the corridor and the main fence in Lonsdale and
Swanston Streets. At the same time the whole site was placed on the register
to ensure the compatibility of new structures with those scheduled for specific
protection. The 1985 study covered all the 1910-16 components still existing
as these were identified as being of significance in the earlier report.
  The primary task of both 1985 reports, as specified by the brief, was
to undertake a conservation analysis based upon the Australia ICOMOS guidelines
to the Burra Charter.
  From this, statements of significance were prepared, based on aesthetic,
historic, scientific and social values and including a comparative analysis
with other examples.
  The existing conditions survey for each site was also based upon relevant
sections of the ICOMOS guidelines. However, a number of specific tasks outside
these guidelines were added by the brief to provide a greater basis for
development proposals.
  In both cases this included the updating of existing plans and recording
alterations. The Queen Victoria Medical Centre report also included the
assessment of the buildings' potential for re-use.
  The final draft of the Queen Victoria Medical Centre report was submitted
in mid-September and the library/museum report at the end of October. The
former was made available to competitors in December and the latter was
not distributed.
 Statement of Significance. 
The State Library and Museum of Victoria buildings are collectively
significant because they have been an educational and cultural centre for
the people of Victoria for the past 130 years. The buildings physically
portray the library, museums and National Gallery's cultural and economic
circumstances over that time, and their architecture is significant for
reflecting their changing philosophies and status. Of particular significance
in displaying that process are Queen's Hall, Barry Hall, and the domed reading
room, its stairhall and stacks, and Monash, Palmer, McCoy, Baldwin Spencer
and Thorpe halls.
  The original Swanston Street building is significant as it houses one
of the first public libraries in the world, and the first public library
and permanent exhibition space in Melbourne. The whole of the Swanston Street
facade is of significance since it is a sophisticated early example of public
architecture in Australia and the first major building executed by Joseph
Reed in Australia.
  The dome building is significant for its advancement of reinforced concrete
technology and its application to a purpose-built structure. The material
was used at a scale previously unequalled and its properties were skilfully
utilized to create one of the largest and best proportioned public spaces
in Australia. The planning, fittings and usage of the dome building are
integral to its significance.
 History of the Buildings and Site.  
Introduction: The site that currently accommodates the State library/museum
complex has been associated with learned institutions since 1854. When Governor
Hotham laid the foundation stone for Melbourne's Public Library it was the
first in Australia. 
  Since then, the site has had a plethora of building activity, much ordered
and refined, the remainder ad hoc and unfortunate. It has been a most complex
growth, involving no fewer than twenty-nine phases of construction, of which
the La Trobe Library (built 1965) was the final phase.
  That the site has experienced such a development is largely a reflection
of the tussle for space by its occupants. While only two insititutions remain
today, it has had a total of five, plus a major exhibition, over the past
150 years. One of the survivors, the Public Library, was also the original
occupant, with its first building opened in 1856. The National Gallery was
soon to follow, opening in an unofficial capacity in 1861. The Gallery stayed
for more than 100 years, until 1967-68, when it moved to its present site
in St Kilda Road. In 1866-67 the site had a short lived yet most influential
occupant, the Intercolonial Exhibition. As a direct follow-on from that
Exhibition, an Industrial and Technological Museum was formed in 1869, and
together with the library and the gallery shared the site until 1899, when
the Natural History Museum was transferred across from the University of
Melbourne.
  The Public Library: When Melbourne's leading citizens were considering
the establishment of a general and public library in 1853, few of the major
libraries in Great Britain and Europe were available for use by the general
public. Most major libraries had grown from royal and church collections,
from private societies, or were based on the great collections of the
universities. 
  Before the Melbourne Public Library was built, the largest library in
the city was that maintained by the Melbourne Mechanic's Institute. In
1856 this institution had a library containing some 6,300 volumes. The use
of the Institute's facilities was only available to members who paid an
entrance fee of ten pounds and an annual subscription of one pound.
  The institute aimed to attract all social classes to its activities and
aimed to be at once a public museum, library and intellectual forum from
which would radiate all the benefits of European culture.
  Although it failed to achieve popularity, except among the elite and
Melbourne's middle classes, the institute represented an important stage
in the development of Melbourne's cultural institutions, and a crucial prelude
to the establishment of the public library, museum and gallery complex.
Both Redmond Barry and David Charteris McArthur had been committee members
of the institute before becoming trustees of the Public Library.
  The library trustees were appointed by proclamation of Charles Joseph
LaTrobe on 20 July 1853. They received a grant of 10,000 pounds and two
acres of land in Swanston Street upon which to build a library. On 3 July
1854 His Excellency, Sir Charles Hotham laid the foundation stone on what
is now the central section of the main Swanston Street wing of the
library/museum complex.
  This first building was the result of a design competition won by Joseph
Reed. It comprised Queen's Hall dominating the first floor, with Palmer
Hall, the entrance foyer and Monash Halls below. Built in four stages, the
first, including the central core of the entrance foyer and small reading
room above, was opened by Major-General McArthur on 11 February 1856.
Subsequently the southern section was opened in May 1859 and the northern
in 1864, completing the internal spaces of Reeds' building. It was not,
however, until 1869-70 that the portico was added and the facade appeared,
much as Reed had planned it more than fifteen years earlier.
  The Melbourne Public Library, although in many respects rather advanced,
did not have a lending library until 1892. A deputation from the Trades
Hall met with the trustees to discuss the need for a lending branch and
it was immediately decided to set one up in the newspaper room. Some books
were transferred from the reference library and others were bought as funds
permitted.
  Although the Government was criticised for the small amounts of money
it spent on building the Public Library collection, especially in comparison
with that of the Parliament library, it grew with such rapidity that by
1885 overcrowding was unbearable. In 1886, Barry Hall was opened in the
Little Lonsdale Street wing of the building. It had capacity for 50,000
books.
  In the first years of the twentieth century the overcrowded situation
again became unbearable. It was in these years that a considerable debate
developed on a suitable site for a new library and or gallery. In 1906 the
architects Reed, Smart and Tappin were instructed to draw up plans for an
octagonal reading room using sketches by Edmund LaTouche Armstrong, based,
it would seem, upon the Library of Congress in Washington. The design of
the new reading room, a central space surrounded by an annulus five storeys
high in which were stored the books, necessitated a system for access. Although
much of the collection was shelved against the walls of the reading room,
other works had to be requested from library officers.
  Armstrong, the librarian, defended his departure from the tradition of
direct public access to the book collection by stating that the most used
books would be kept in the reading room, that the new system would be speedy,
and that the fact that the collection was growing by 6,000 to 7,000 volumes
a year made adoption of some new system of storage inevitable. The new
octagonal building with long desks radiating from a raised central supervisor's
platform allowed supervision which was not irksome. The building would be
freestanding and could be separated from the old building by fireproof doors
thereby fulfilling another stipulation for modern libraries. The Swanston
Street wing would, it was argued, shield the great room from the street
noise. The reading room was to be lit by glass sections in the dome and
would be ventilated by a ducted motor driven fan system.
  The domed reading room was opened on 14 November 1913 by Governor-General
Lord Denman. The reading room, like its predecessor, was seen as a cultural
symbol, a focus of learning essential to the well-being of the metropolis.
The people's pride in their new building was demonstrated by their constant
attendance.
  The Intercolonial Exhibition, 1866-1867: This exhibition was opened on
24 October 1866, and while housed on the library/museum site, little remains
of its buildings. The exhibition was, however, of profound significance
in the evolution of the present conglomeration of buildings and institutions.
  The notion of holding intercolonial exhibitions was conceived by the pioneer
of technical education in the colony, Samuel Henry Bindon, MLA (1812-1879).
The concept of an intercolonial exhibition was a new one because previously
at all exhibitions held within Australia or overseas, the colonies had acted
independently of each other. The 1866 event signalled a new community of
purpose, a sense that the colonies shared common interests beteen themselves
and the rest of the world.
  The decision to build the exhibition's buildings on the library reserve
was a result of the belief that there should be a great centre of interlinked
institutions which would nurture the intellectual, artistic and commercial
development of the colony. Such a complex should not merely gather together
books, works of art, scientific specimens and industrial exhibits, but should
also perform an active educative function. This ideal was largely fulfilled
with the exhibition and the subsequent creation of the Museum of Technology.
  The range of exhibits in the exhibition demonstrated its similarity to
a museum complex, particularly that envisaged by men like Redmond Barry.
The nature of many of the exhibits - collections of gems from throughout
Australia, a large photographic record of the Colony of Victoria and a
project to document Aboriginal languages - evidenced a desire to record,
preserve and teach, which was essential to their vision of a museum complex.
  A master plan for the present library/museum site had been prepared in
1860. It comprised two bold quadrangular buildings: the west building for
the library, the east for the museums.

