The Brontes: self devouring By Robin Grove  

   Scene: the author's study. He writes. Out of his head come incidents,
   speeches, characters, until the possibilities of the plot are fulfilled.
   Creative work complete, he now awaits the verdict of his readers.

I think it would be right to say that every part of that scenario is in
question nowadays. From the pronouns on, each point of definition has become,
in recent critical thinking, a point of mobilization and dislodgement. Author;
audience; "self" itself: none is understood as a closed sufficiency, or
even a closeable one, and discourse about literature is correspondingly
decentred and thrown open. We like to contrast this active state of affairs
with the false certainties, the solid, stolid humanism, of earlier accounts
of literary production; but it's not so simple perhaps. At least one famous
nineteenth-century essay unsettles any such comparison. Here are some sentences
from near the end of Charlotte Bronte's Preface to the new (1850) edition
of Wuthering Heights:

  

So what is literary work the work of? Not always the author, this author
claims - and in that paradox is represented the unstable dynamism which
drives the paragraph forward. Highly personal though the gestures of rhetoric
are, "Not I" is the message they aim to convey; when we write from our deepest
creativity, it is Fate or Inspiration which controls. But this romantically
coloured doctrine is only the topmost of Bronte's self-displacements, for
in writing about "the writer" her Preface erases precisely those writers
closest to hand, herself and her sisters that is. Their (female) presence
has been edited out of the sentences - emasculated, so to speak, by truncating
each "she" to a "he", so that female Author, a doubly demanding term on
the terms provided here, is doubly cancelled out. If anyone performs the
act of genius, it's not her.
  Removing the sign of one's gender looks like admitting that one is inferior,
really - a negative strategy for writers to adopt, who after all by virtue
of our reading them can feel that for now at least they hold the stage/page
of our attention. It is characteristic of this writer, though, that negatives
themselves should be negated, to say "Not Not-I either"; for the moment
at which female authoring disappears becomes the moment that male authority
is likewise made unable to take its place. "The writer who possesses the
creative gift owns something", we are told, "of which he is not always master".
It's an odd proprietorship, if to own is not to have as one's own, and the
owner does not have what has been given to him at his own disposal. Employer?
or servant in fact? Authorship is the site for a struggle for power. So
sexual dislodgements extend themselves into class dislodgements, it appears.
Yet whichever way we put it, that which was cast out in one form returns
victorious in another. Like the governesses and millhands of Charlotte Bronte's
fiction, like Heathcliff and Nelly Dean for that matter, what seemed mastered,
isn't; it wills and works for itself, and won't consent to being non-being
any longer. Inspiration therefore (the dispossessed) may finally triumph
over the law-giver who lays down rules and devises principles - except that
that unpredictable triumph itself turns out to be a rule, a principle,
pre-ordained: as the Preface gives us to understand by appropriating the
visions of the Book of Job. "Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in
the furrow?" The lawlessness of the unicorn and the wild ass's breaking
loose are nothing less than god-given, God implies. Men may seek to tame
them, but the supreme law-giver Himself decrees revolt, it being in the
nature of His creation to rise up against the hes who re/present Him. (Divine
authority: always a dangerous thing to evoke - even for God, one suddenly
sees.) It may not be making ropes out of sea-sand, but the result of all
this - these sayings gain-saying the position they claim - is to put the
Preface to Wuthering Heights in unresolvable rebellion against itself. "I
do not know; I scarcely think ... But this I know", its sentences declare,
firmly enthroning the very "I" which is in the process of abdicating mastery.
The knot tied over and over slips through itself in a striking instance
of authorial self-undoing, and the Preface exhibits exactly the phenomenon
("something that at times strangely wills and works for itself") which it
insists it has no power to insist upon, direct, exhibit or call up.
  The old word for some of this was "contradiction". As such, it usen't
to be well thought of, and a writer who dealt in contradictories, maintaining
both X and not-X, one point of view and its opposite as well, had most likely
got into a muddle. Intelligent novels didn't. When probed more sharply,
however, contra/diction could be half-excused as the symptom of a need:
a regrettable need, no doubt - to obscure "real" feelings, for instance,
or cover one's tracks, or utter forbidden things and thus be obliged to
speak with a double tongue. The thesis behind such explanation is that unitary
consciousness is the natural state of the healthy soul, as of the good society,
and that those who are right with the world have nothing they need to conceal.
In contrast, what we are likely to see in the Brontes nowadays is that
concealment and contradiction are essential to them, and that their texts
are irreducibly multiple, contradictory, warped, putting together a scriptural
world in which the state of the soul is not unitary at all, but powerfully
diverse. Even in "fulfilment", it remains un-united; even identity's most
extraordinary assertion of all ("Nelly, I am Heathcliff") becomes the moment
of partition (in the midst of Catherine's saying so, Heathcliff simply leaves).
Elsewhere, identity is shown as a hungry preying upon its own elements,
the selves which constitute itself - or constitute rather that strange amalgam
of "I-Not-I", it/self, a composite internally split.
  As in Jane Eyre. "I was a discord at Gateshead Hall", the heroine's voice
declares; and the Reeds and their servants would agree. The discord however
is not just between the little girl and her surroundings, me and them. Rather,
as we come to realize, Jane is a discordancy too, at variance with and
different from herself. Like other Bronte heroines, she is haunted by glimpses
of her selves; she is there and not-there in that looking glass which repeats
the "vacant majesty" of the Red Room. From inside its visionary hollow,
a strange little figure gazes at her, with white face and arms "specking"
the gloom - at once famished and threatening in its insubstantiality. Each
sees the other with glittering eyes of fear; and the pattern of being there/not
there is continued through the book - in dreams and memories of the orphan
child Jane comes to realize is her own (so where is she?), in the dismay
with which she identifies the wedding-garments in her wardrobe ... and so
on. Different, not just from others, but from herself: within the confines
of nineteenth-century realism (Jane Eyre: An Autobiography), this has
subversive results. And the famous coincidences and extravagances of the
plot, while showing how much the book is willing to abandon in order to
get where it wants, contain an ideology of their own, a reading of what
is "true" to women: in this case, the experience of being co-incident, divided,
implausible - wandering (literally vagrant, Jane finds) outside the limits
of what is proper or "realistic" to report.
  "Who is this? Who is this?", the blinded Rochester asks. "It is you -
isn't it, Jane?" His question, perhaps, ought to be the reader's more often
than it is. The book makes one wonder if its heroine can be identified by
securing her in a grasp. "Identity" itself turns into a division - between
self in its selfhood (that which it uniquely is), and co-presence identity
with another. Each meaning of the word, though contradictory, remembers
its opposite. So "identifying" is not a matter of singling out the one true
note of character, but of listening to all that sounds together in the discords
the novel strikes: the score it never settles.

  

One feels sure that that awfully sudden story, produced as true, is a pack
of convenient lies. But for a novel to produce a book inside itself, words
describing more fictional words, and to put the tract into the non-existent
hands of a purely verbal figure, is to raise quite sharply the question
whether it is practising falsehoods, deceits, convenient lies of its own.
No one, I think, has ever been in much doubt that Charlotte Bronte has an
axe to grind. The book evokes, vividly, the injustice, exploitation, cruel
indifference suffered by the victims of a self-righteous property-class;
it speaks on behalf of those who have not the means to alter their fate,
and can look ahead to nothing but poverty, loneliness, neglect. But then
doesn't the story suddenly swerve away? At the start, the small weak
unbrilliant child is less than a servant (as she's reminded by those who
earn their keep), bewildered, frightened, self-doubting; yet she confronts
her oppressors with un-quailing independence and a retort or two capable
of peircing their cant. By the close of the book, the independence might
be said to be all on the other foot, for Fate is altered - alters itself
- in Jane's lucky case.
  What has happened to Bronte's protest now? Her heroine, gifted with wealth
of her own, and a husband, is installed in the privileges of just such a
system, qua system, as the one she rebelled against. From powerlessness,
she comes to power; from seeing class-operations for what they are, she
graduates to a respectable blindness which can overlook, or (worse) approvingly
over-see arrangements of the kind. That is what is expected, after all,
of the mistress of the house. On learning then that this is what Jane has
become, John, the housekeeper's husband, politely tugs his forelock, and
has five pounds slipped into his faithful hand. Inferiors know their place
at Ferndean, Rochester's damp green corner of nineteenth-century estate,
and John and Mary both, so Jane observes, are "of that decent, phlegmatic
order of people" (sc., employees) who don't have too much to say. She has
forgotten that to be a dependent is to be shut up already, where property
not only claims its rights of obedience, gratitude, docility, but occupies
the conversational space as well. ("Be seated somewhere", says Mrs Reed,
"and until you can speak pleasantly, remain silent.") Jane's elevation,
therefore, from governess-subordinant to wife, is spoken-for in her wonderful
increase of vocal spending-power; while others work, the lady of the house
is busy talking with Mr Rochester ("I believe all day long"); and since
the prattle of her former pupil would make a foreign intrusion here, Adele
is packed off to be schooled elsewhere, till a soundly English education
has corrected her French defects and produced a most satisfying change in
the little girl. "By her grateful attention to me and mine", the new Jane sums
it up, "she has long since well repaid any little kindness I ever had it in my
power to offer her." Money-relations indeed. Well-tempered, quiet and a good
investment, Adele is a shining example of what proper training can do. If only
Jane herself had been so "obliging" a companion to the aunt who provided for
her, we wouldn't have needed to have the book of her life at all.
  So where has the bad animal locked in the Red Room, the answererback to
Brocklehurst, the defiant fiancee or governess yearning for freedom across the
"battlements" of Thornfield ... where has this other, possible, wilder woman
gone? Back into the text where "she" always was, is the answer I suppose, for
it's that which maintains all the Jane Eyre in Jane Eyre - maintains it
precisely through being fractured, dispersed. The girl in her rage of
indignation; the wife who enjoys a "perfect concord" with her Master: I don't
know how we are to reconcile the two.

