Art as reflection in Jessica Anderson's Tirra Lirra by the River By Roslynn D. Haynes   

JESSICA Anderson's title is, at first sight, uninviting. Even the most ardent
Tennyson reader must have secretly felt that Sir Lancelot could have found
something more profound or manly to sing than `Tirra lirra', and to single
out this line for a title seems only to emphasize its deficiencies. However
the title in fact points to one of the most important themes of the novel
- one which, I believe, has been overlooked by critics - namely the author's
assertion of her criteria of art.
  It is, of course, apparent from the poem that the Lady of Shallot is isolated
from both the countryside and the court of Camelot. She is said to live
under a `curse', whereby she is a virtual prisoner; she may not even look
out of her window at the `real' world but must observe this external world
by means of its reflection in a mirror positioned opposite the window. Here
she sits and weaves her tapestries, her works of art, not from reality,
but from the refleciton of that reality. To this extent the poem has been
read as Tennyson's own statement about the nature of poetry, about the
necessary isolation of the poet from involvement in the so-called `real'
world of activity, proclaimed as a moral necessity by the Cambridge Apostles.
When the Lady looks directly at the scene, and perhaps especially when she
looks at Sir Lancelot, her work of art is destroyed; when she leaves her
isolation, she dies.
  The poem is centred on the Lady and most critical comment has inevitably
attached to her and to the moral she embodies. However, the poem ends with,
and thereby emphasizes, the wholly inadequate response of Sir Lancelot to
the Lady. In fact, Tennyson's treatment of Sir Lancelot, in this poem at
least, is far from complimentary. He cuts a fine figure on his horse, to
be sure, but there is a rather unpalatable suggestion that, despite the
representation of service and humility on his shield, he is perfectly aware
of the impression he is making and complacently accepts admiration as his
due. It is clear that his first, and perhaps only, criterion for assessing
ladies is `a lovely face'. Even more than the rest of the Camelot crowd
(which, even if it does not understand the event, at least responds with
holy fear, analogous, perhaps, to the response to the poet/vates envisaged
by Coleridge in `Kubla Khan'), Sir Lancelot completely fails to perceive
the significance of the Lady's life and death.
  Here we can see immediately some of the parallels with the novel. Nora
Porteous also is, or was, a weaver of tapestries. On her return to the Brisbane
house of her childhood, she is shown three tapestries which she made there
when in her early twenties, and what she says about these tapestries is
highly significant. The first one represents an orange tree - not an orange
tree copied from nature, but a very stylized one - `the leaves and fruit
... compose a tight bouquet above a straight trunk' (p.65) - and the birds
too are not realistic but `fabulous'. This is precisely why, Nora believes,
the tapestry is so successful.
  The second tapestry, by contrast, Nora considers a failure, `muddled in
execution', and her reason for this estimate is the same one which causes
Betty Cust to admire it - the fact that `you would think that maggie was
real'. `Something I actually saw and tried, with mistaken fidelity, to
reproduce', says Nora.
  The third tapestry is described very briefly but we can deduce that it
is an abstract pattern. Nora's swirling suns, moons and stars bear no relation
to objective reality; perhaps they, too, were suggested by lines from `The
Lady of Shallot':               

     As often thro' the purple night.
     Below the starry clusters bright.
     Some bearded meteor, trailing light.
       Moves over still Shallot.

At any rate, they are created, not from Nature, but from within the artist,
`drawn out of the compression of a secret life', Nora thinks.
  Nora, then, is analogous to the Lady of Shallot. If we accept her judgement
of the relative merits of the tapestries as artistically valid, then her
tapestries are less successful when they are realistic (the second tapestry
approximates to life through the window) and succeed best when they do not
try to mimic reality but recreate it (tapestries one and three). With respect
to these works of art, Nora's equivalent of the Lady's mirror, the medium
through which the external world is transmuted, is her creative imagination,
which does not reproduce orange trees, birds and celestial bodies
realistically, but transforms the external world into a unique artistic
form. At this stage, though, Nora is like the Lady, `half sick of shadows';
the world of physical involvement, the world of Camelot, attracts her,
particularly when it is presented in the persons of the dark, handsome,
arrogant, Lancelot-figure, John Porteous, and his `Prince Charming' nephew,
Colin. But, like the Lady of Shallot again, Nora finds that `life' in the
`outside' world is associated only with symbols of death - in her case a
sterile marriage, an abortion, chronic illness, a suidide attempt and artistic,
if not actual, death. Moreover, the inhabitants of this world are as
imperceptive of her artistic worth as their counterparts in Camelot.
  There is another aspect of the novel which is comparable with `The Lady
of Shallot' and that is the sense of fate which Nora feels. At the very
beginning of the novel Nora says, `I feel again the utter passivity, the
relinquishment of the will to fate' (p.2) and describes her perverse pleasure
when her `worst expectations are met'. Her return to the Brisbane house
is itself seen as the working out of the inevitable. Her sister had expected
and prepared for it and although, all her life, Nora has fought against
the influence of Grace, she has returned, has inherited Grace's lifestyle,
even to the extent of preserving the compost.
  Throughout the novel Nora oscillates between bursts of optimism and blank
despair and in these latter moods, fatalism is a mode of consolation, an
insurance policy against further disappointment. Nora sometimes calls this
her `intuition' (p.105) but other people's predictions for Nora come true
as well, insofar as she habitually acts as other people expect. `It was
less exhausting simply to be as reckless, cynical and frivolous as they
said I was' (p.70). Indeed Nora's life is forced into one mould after another,
by her mother and sister, by the girls and boys of her adolescence, by Colin
and his mother; even at `Number 6' she assumes the manner of speaking and
attitudes of mind of the other members of the group. Thus she imagines herself
recounting the incident of lying in a trance in the grass with bare breasts
until disturbed by the horse.

     It would have had to be told at a time when Fred was not there ...
     and we three were gossiping in Liza's quarters ... And after I had
     finished, I know what Hilda and Liza would have said ... And I would
     probably have said, yes, of course.  (p.10)  

  This almost compulsive conformity would seem to parallel to the curse
upon the Lady which determines her behaviour and punishes relentlessly any
deviation from the permitted pattern. Colin's revenge is savage upon a wife
who does not conform totally to his stereotype of what is appropriate, whether
on the tennis court or in bed. `Do this ... Do that,' he orders her sexual
responses (p.37) so that at thirty-five, Nora feels reduced to a two-line
entry: `Nora Porteous, nee Roche, thirty-five, domestic worker, amateur
dressmaker, detested concubine, and student of the French subjunctive tense
[sic]' (p.60). Significantly, the extortioner-abortionist who performs his
operation with such criminal mismanagement is reminiscent of Colin Porteous.
He barks out the same orders, `Do this. Do that', and registers the same
disgust at female sexuality. Even on her return to Brisbane, Nora, at seventy,
is still reluctant to depart from the behaviour expected of her by the Custs
and Lyn Wilmot; she is still under the spell of conformity to the pattern
determined for her by others, by fate.
  If it stopped short at this level the novel would be an interesting but
perhaps rather unsubtle analogy. However Nora also has another `mirror',
from which she weaves the work of art that is the novel itself. That mirror,
symbolized by the spinning globe in her head, is her stream of thought in
which her past experiences are reflected as she recalls them. Thus the meaning
of the novel involves an implicit pun on the word `reflection', since Nora's
process of reflecting on her life provides the mirror whereby that life
can be transformed into art. Therefore the events of Nora's life, as recreated
for us in the novel, are not as they were when she first exprienced them;
they are not, for example, in chronological order, or intense or passionate,
but reordered according to the will of the artist - as the original events
were not; they are distanced from us and defused of passion - `emotion
recollected in tranquillity This is not the result of any
inadequacy on the part of the author, but is a basic part of her statement
about art.
  This theme is introduced early in the novel with the miniature landscape
created by the distorting effect of the `cheap, thick glass' in the window
(`glass', of course, is also used here with the double meaning of `looking
glass'). This landscape is both unreal and also, for Nora, more real than
the objective reality in the yard.

     These distortions in the cheap thick glass gave me my first intimation
     of a country as beautiful as those in my childhood books. I would kneel
     on a chair by this window, and after finding the required angle of
     vision ... I would keep very still, afraid to move lest I lose it.
     I was deeply engrossed by those miniature landscapes, green, wet,
     romantic, with silver serpentine rivulets, and flashing lakes, and
     castles moulded out of any old stick or stone. I believe they enchanted
     me. Kneeling on that chair, I was scarcely present at all. My other
     landscape had absorbed me.  (pp. 8-9)  

  Nora herself draws the connection with the poems of Tennyson, not only
by mention of The Idylls of the King and `The Lady of Shallot', but by her
explicit correlation between the world of Camelot with the curse on the
Lady, and the interior world of her mind with the spell cast by her vision
of the imaginary landscape:

     I already had my Camelot. I no longer looked through the glass. I no
     longer needed to. In fact, to do so would have broken rather than
     sustained the spell, because that landscape had become a region of
     my mind, where infinite expansion was possible, and where no obtrusion
     ... could prevent the emergence of Sir Lancelot.  (p.9) (my italics)  

  Here, then, at the very beginning of the novel, we have an affirmation
about art - the kind of art in which Jessica Anderson believes. It is not
the art of sensation, of shock, of attempts to make us experience horror
or ugliness by rubbing our noses in it. The novel contains several incidents
which invite sensational treatment - Nora's experience at the abortionist's,
her attempted suicide, her failed face-lift, Dorothy Rainbow's massacre
of her children and subsequent suicide; yet these are related in an almost
off-hand way. The novel affirms that, despite modern assumptions and fashions
in art and film, we do not understand things better by experiencing them
at the white heat of passion and intensity, but only by distancing ourselves
from them, by reflecting on them and, through the process of artistic creation,
transforming them. Nora tells us how she used to walk by the real river,
`broad, brown and strong', but she `hardly saw it and never used it as a
location for [her] dreams'.
        
