<sample>
	<id> J69 </id>
	


	<note> 2038 </note>
	


	<source> Food Technology in Australia - February 1986 </source>
	


	<h> The use of bread in diets for weight reduction </h>
	


	<bl> By L.A. Simons, P.L. Stone and J. Simons </bl>
	

This study demonstrates that weight loss and a fall in blood pressure and
plasma lipids can occur with a nutritionally adequate, energy controlled
diet containing six sandwich slices of bread daily. These changes were compared
to those occurring on a similar energy controlled diet but containing only
three sandwich slices of bread daily. Since the changes occurring on both
diets were similar, more bread if desired could be permitted in controlled
weight loss regimens.

Overweight and obesity are major health problems in Australia with
approximately 43% of men and 35% of women between the ages of 25-64 years
being either overweight or obese (National Heart Foundation 1983). Dietary
Guidelines (Commonwealth Department of Health 1982) focus attention on weight
control. In addition they advocate reduced intakes of fat, sugar, alcohol
and salt, and an increased consumption of breads, cereals, fruits and
vegetables. A weight-reduction and maintenance diet should therefore comply
with these guidelines.
  Bread is a much maligned food. Australian-based surveys report that about
75% of consumers believe bread is `fattening' (Flour Millers' Council of
Australia 1979). It is therefore not surprising that bread consumption is
often severely restricted or even eliminated by those wishing to lose weight.
Such a negative attitude has been one of the many factors contributing to
the 30% decline in bread consumption in the last 30 years (Australian Bureau
of Statistics 1984). In fact bread, being low in fat and sugar, moderate
in energy and an important source of dietary fibre, vitamins and minerals,
is an excellent food for dieters.
  To comply with Dietary Guidelines and persuade people while dieting to
eat more than the usually recommended 2-3 slices of bread it will be necessary
to eradicate the myth that bread is `fattening'. Limited overseas studies
have successfully demonstrated weight loss and reductions in blood fat levels
through use of diets containing large proportions of white or fibre-increased
bread (Steller 1979, Mickelsen et al. 1979). Against this background it
was felt desirable to measure changes in weight, blood pressure and blood
lipid levels in an Australian setting using a diet containing*cotaining
six sandwich slices of mixed grain, wholemeal or fibre-increased bread per
day, and to compare results with those from a conventional weight-reduction
diet containing three sandwich slices of the same types of bread per day.


	<h> Materials and methods </h>
	
To find a sufficiently large sample of healthy, overweight subjects who
liked eating bread, advertisements were placed in Sydney suburban newspapers.
Subjects were asked to attend a preliminary briefing (Visit 0) where they
were informed that a 7-week commitment was required and that blood pressure
measurement and venepuncture would be performed at the commencement and
conclusion of the program. A questionnaire was used to measure past and
present bread consumption, attitudes towards bread and whether subjects
had previously dieted. All subjects were offered a low energy diet for weight
reduction; but they were not informed that 2 separate diets were to be
employed: the `Bread Diet' (5250 kJ per day including 6 slices of bread),
devised by the Bread Research Institute*Institue of Australia or a Conventional
Diet (5250 kJ per day including 3 slices of bread) as published by the NSW
Department of Health (Health Commission of NSW 1982). Table 1 shows a typical
daily menu from both the Bread and Conventional diets.
  Subjects opted to attend either a morning or evening group (about 20 subjects
per group, 2 morning and 4 evening groups). Unbeknown to the subjects, one
morning group and one evening group were offered the Conventional Diet,
while the remaining groups were offered the Bread Diet. That is, a
`quasi-experimental' design was established on the basis of time preference,
but with no randomisation or matching of entry characteristics.
  The dietary program (either diet) consisted of standard dietetic counselling
provided by a dietitian, plus support from a home economist and a physician.
Approximate compositions of the prescribed diets are summarised in Table
2. The use of wholemeal bread was encouraged, but other varieties of bread
were permitted.
  At*A visit 1 a brief demographic and medical questionnaire was completed,
after which subjects were weighed in light street clothing and heights
measured. Relative body weight was computed from Metropolitan Life Insurance
Tables (observed/ideal x 100). Body Mass Index (BMI) was calculated as
weight/height2  (kg/m2). A single casual blood pressure reading was obtained
after 5 minutes seated rest (mercury sphygomanometer, standard cuff, phase
v diastolic, one observer) and a non-fasting blood sample was drawn for
measurement of plasma lipids. Plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels
were determined by automated enzymatic methods (Allain et al. 1974, Buculo
&amp; David 1973). Blood pressure measurement or venepuncture could not be
performed in some cases due to technical difficulties.
  Subjects attended weekly thereafter for seven weeks and were weighed each
time. Each weekly meeting had a specific theme for discussion including
explanation of the diet, information on bread and bread varieties, health
aspects of obesity and diet cooking hints. To encourage a large attendance
at the final session (Visit 8), subjects who had completed Visits 1 and
2, but who failed to attend for Visits 6 and 7, were sent a letter urging
their attendance at Visit 8, where blood pressure measurement and venepuncture
were performed for the second time. After 42 weeks participants were contacted
by telephone to give their present weight.
  Data were analysed using The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences
(Nie et al, 1975). Differences between means were compared by Student's
t-test, using a two-tailed distribution. The association of weight change
with changes in other variables was examined through calculation of the
Pearson correlation coefficient `r'. A one-tailed test of statistical
significance was employed here because of a definite expectation about the
direction of r.


	<note> Tables 1-5 </note>
	


	<h> Results </h>
	
The newspaper advertisements produced an encouraging response. Two hundred
people indicated an interest in the program; 134 attended the preliminary
meeting and 125 attended Visits 1 and 2. On a purely arbitrary basis, data
have been analysed only for those who attended Visits 1 and 2 indicating
minimum commitment.
  The 125 subjects comprised 115 females and 10 males with 25% taking
anti-hypertensive medication. Visit 8 was completed by 96 subjects, the
completion rate being the same for both sexes and for those using or not
using anti-hypertensive medication. The mean age of the group was 50 years
(range 19-71) and the average degree of overweight was 36% (range 5% to
157%).
Consumption, attitudes and dieting history of participants
  The questionnaire completed by all enrolled participants indicated that
in the non-dieting phase 77% consumed between 2-4 slices of bread per day
with the majority of subjects eating only brown, mixed grain, wholemeal
or fibre-increased. The responses to statements about bread indicated that
the group was approximately equally divided in their belief as to whether
bread was or was not `fattening' (Table 3). When rating bread on a scale
`excellent to poor', bread rated below fruits, vegetables, meat, fish and
poultry but scored better than milk, breakfast cereals and biscuits (Table
4).
  Of the subjects 92% has previously dieted, and of these 95% had lost weight;
over half had lost more than 6 kg. While dieting, 81% had eaten 2 or less
slices of bread daily. Subsequently, lost weight was regained by 92% of
the sample.

	<h> Bread diet versus conventional diet </h>
	
Of the 125 subjects completing Visits 1 and 2, 82 were allocated to the
Bread Diet and 43 to the Conventional Diet. In percentage terms, the
distribution of sexes, the numbers using anti-hypertensive medication and
the numbers completing the study were very similar for both diet groups.
For subjects completing Visit 8, the mean age on each diet was identical at 50
years. In the Bread Diet group, 51% of subjects were overweight and 29.3% obese
while on the Conventional Diet group 55.8% were overweight and 23.3% obese
(based on BMI). Overall, subjects on the Bread Diet were 9% more overweight
than their counterparts on the Conventional Diet. For subjects not completing
Visit 8, those on either diet tended to be slightly younger and slightly
more overweight than those completing the study, although these differences
did not reach statistical significance.
  The cumulative weight changes over 7 weeks are summarised for each diet
in Table 5. Cumulative weight losses with each diet were very similar. Weight
loss seemed to have slowed by Visit 7, although it did not appear to have
ceased. This was confirmed by the self-reported weights at 42 weeks. Weight
losses varied greatly according to adherence to the diet, the greatest loss
being 8 kg on the Conventional Diet and 8.7 kg for the Bread Diet. Only
two people on the Bread Diet and one person on the Conventional Diet reached
within 5% of their recommended weight according to Life Insurance Tables.
  Since the attendance rates of Visit 8 were `inflated' (see materials and
methods), the attendance rates at Visit 7 give a more accurate reflection
of true dropout. In percentage terms, the cumulative rate of dropout (from
Visit 2) was essentially the same for each diet
over the whole period, reaching about 39% by Visit 7.
  There were falls in blood pressure and plasma lipid levels over the 7
weeks but there were no significant differences between the changes observed
with the two diets (Table 6). The respective diets were equally palatable
and acceptable to the subjects.
Self-reported telephone follow up after 42 weeks
  It was possible to contact 60% of the total sample by telephone after
42 weeks to determine their current weights. Of those contacted, the initial
weights were 75.7 kg _ 14.2 kg and after 42 weeks their self-reported weights
were 71.6 _ 12.9 kg (P&lt;0.001).


	<h> Discussion and conclusions </h>
	
This weight-control program was conducted in a general community setting
using diets based on differing quantities of bread. The dropout rate was
39% over 6 weeks, which is a fairly typical experience (Garrow 1981). Since
it was possible to examine 77% of subjects at 7 weeks it is likely that
the various metabolic changes noted are reasonably representative of all
subjects originally enrolled.
  The mean weight loss for both diet groups was the same at 3.3-3.5 kg over
7 weeks, an expected result in view of the similarity in energy content
of the two diets. This loss is in accord with recommendations by dietitians
of an acceptable weight loss of 0.5-1 kg per week while dieting (English
1979).
  Compared with the West German Bread Study (Steller 1979), participants
in the Bread Diet group lost less weight. In the German study participants
eating 220-285 g of either white or fibre increased bread daily (about 8-11
slices) lost an average of 6 kg in 4 weeks on a diet of similar energy content.
However, meals in that program were provided and eaten at the University
of Giessen, thus avoiding the temptation to overeat and pick during meal
preparation. Participants in our study indicated they `broke' the diet,
particularly when eating out or when guests came, hence dietary adherence
was not as strict.
  Perhaps the most severe test that any weight-reuction program faces is
the maintenance of weight loss. It was possible after 42 weeks to contact
60% of the participants by phone and to obtain a self-reported weight. The
results were encouraging with participants continuing to lose weight. There
was no significant difference beteen those on the Bread or Conventional
Diets. The average bread consumption had also remained about the same, being
3 slices per day for the Conventional and 5 per day for the Bread Diet group.
While this result is potentially flawed, it does give a broad indication
of continuing weight loss.
  As expected, there was a significant fall in blood pressure and plasma
cholesterol and triglyceride levels with weight loss, confirming previous
results (Wolf &amp; Grundy 1983, Reisin et al. 1978, Ramsay et al.1978, Tuck
et al. 1981, Steller et al. 1979). These changes could also have been
attributed in part to the composition of the diets. Compared to estimates
given as to what Australians are eating, both diets contained significantly
reduced quantities of fat, cholesterol, salt, alcohol (none) and an increased
proportion of polyunsaturated to saturated fats (Simons et al. 1978, NH&amp;MRC
1982, Australian Bureau of Statistics 1984).   


</sample>
