<sample>
	<id> J71 </id>
	


	<note> 2015 words </note>
	


	<source> Design of shearing sheds and sheep yards </source>
	


	<bl> By A A Barber and R B Freeman </bl>
	


	<h> CHAPTER 5  The Wool Handling Area </h>
	

The third working area readily identifiable in a shearing shed is the area
where the wool is prepared, assessed, packaged and identified ready for
transport to the wool store. The significance of these activities cannot
be overemphasized. They are the culmination of breeding, nutrition and
management strategies for the year; they can influence the value and integrity
of the product; they are the final steps in the harvesting operation and
can help or hinder the quest for a fair return in the marketplace.
  The pursuit of the objective of best value for money must not be interpreted
as a search for speed and convenience at any cost. Rather it is the disciplined
analysis which reduces or eliminates the unnecessary and unproductive tasks
in order that greater attention can be given to the essential and productive
activities. To be successful in this area requires an understanding of the
needs of those for whom the woolgrowers' product is a basic raw material.
  With the types of shearing sheds now being built, labour savings are being
achieved in the wool room. These savings result from a combination of factors
such as:
  ‚2improved design giving faster and easier removal of wool from the board
    with reduced walking distance for the handlers
  ‚2wool room equipment designed to make clip preparation easier and eliminate
    unnecessary handling of wool
  ‚2objective clip preparation as the recommended method of wool handling.

  It is fitting as an introduction to the wool room to stress that an improved
wool harvesting system and its effect on the layout of the shearing shed
and the methods of wool handling do not equate with slapdash or careless
procedures. In any wool harvesting system the wool must be handled, classed
and packaged to appropriate industry standards.
  Research and development over recent years has enabled important processing
characteristics of wool to be quantitatively determined. Objective measurement
is the use of standardized measurement procedures employing randomly drawn
and statistically representative samples to determine significant
characteristics of commercial quantities of wool. Objective measurement
has largely replaced subjective assessment, and authoritative certificates
describing key characteristics accompany representative samples in today's
marketing system. Further changes will occur aimed at increasing the accuracy
and reliability of the description of wool and at improving the efficiency
of the entire marketing and distribution operation. The continuing refinement
of such techniques can bring benefits to producer, purchaser, processor
and user. The acceptance of objective measurement and its application in
the preparing of wool in the shearing shed has led to the establishment
of more rational clip preparation procedures.
  Objective clip preparation (OCP) is the activity in the shearing shed whereby
fleeces are prepared and classified on the basis of objective measurement
into lines of wool with similar processing performance in accordance with
quality standards established by a representative committee of the wool
industry. It applies to single mobs of sheep of the same breeding which
have run together under the same environmental conditions since the last
shearing. The basis of OCP is the quantitative measurement of relevant
characteristics which are determined and published after receival at the
wool store, but prior to sale, for the use of both producer and purchaser.
The practical application of OCP in the shed results in fewer lines of wool
compared with traditional methods, the wool being suitable for sale by sample
or description.
  A large proportion of Australian wool is suitable for preparation according
to these rational procedures which can be applied to both merino and crossbred
clips. While objective measurement and its related selling and distribution
strategies provide significant advances in various other sectors of the
wool industry, OCP is a crucial factor in efficient handling of wool in
the shearing shed. It provides the basis of an effective materials handling
system and is a key element in helping the wool producer improve his wool
harvesting performance. Since the planning principle for this area of the
shearing shed is the employment of methods and equipment which combine to
give an efficient materials handling system, the correct application of
the agreed preparation procedures is at the heart of this principle.


	<h> Raised and curved shearing boards </h>
	
The main features of raised boards have been described in the preceding
chapter. The purpose of this section is to deal with their contribution
to the handling of the wool. The height of the board is such that the wool
handlers operate with the wool at table or bench height. This eliminates
bending down to pick up fleeces, bellies or locks. In sheds with three to
six stands where the board may be curved as well as raised, the shearers
are grouped around the wool tables so that walking distances between stands,
and between each stand and a wool table, are minimized. Wool handlers thus
have a clear view of the entire shearing board, they are able to prepare
the wool at normal bench height, and spend a minimum of time walking to
and fro.
  The general problem of dark fibre contamination of the wool is a serious
one and requires careful attention. The dark fibres occur mainly because
of pigmentation and unscourable urine stain, and research indicates that
urine-stained fibres are the primary problem for Australian wool. With the
emphasis on efficient use of essential labour, modern shearing sheds provide
opportunity for more careful scrutiny of wool in respect of this problem.
With unproductive activities minimized, there is time to examine the wool
with greater care, and the raised board permits this to be done while the
handler is in a normal standing position. Pizzle stain in wethers and breech
stain in ewes can be removed from the fleece and separated from all other
classes of wool before the fleece is picked up from the board and thrown
on the table. Removing some, or even most, of the stain is not good enough
since one staple of urine-stained wool in ten fleeces is enough to require
rejection of the fabric ultimately produced. Removing stain can be effectively
carried out on the raised board before the fleece reaches the wool table
where handlers must keep other matters in mind as they prepare the wool.
  The fleece left by the shearer can be picked up in normal manner, or,
if the wool table is not free, it can be simply put aside leaving ample
space for the shearer to work with the next sheep. There is no need to
pick up the fleece, put it down, and then pick it up a second time to throw
it on the table. When transferring the fleece from the board to the wool
table, the handler rarely has to move more than a few paces, and there is
adequate time to clear the board of locks. No brooms are used on raised
boards, but rather a light piece of timber or stiff plastic is used to direct
the locks from the shearing area to the wool room floor. The locks gradually
accumulate, and can be swept up at the end of each run.
  The raised board allows wool handlers to carry out the initial phases
of wool preparation in a more natural working posture permitting greater
concentration on the important aspects of stain removal and board tidiness.
In appropriate circumstances, the raised board may be curved so as to improve
access and minimize distances between work stations.


	<h> Wool tables </h>
	
The usual practice in the past has been to throw the fleece on a rectangular
table so that it can be inspected and inferior portions removed. Rectangular
tables usually measure 3000 mm long by 1500 mm wide and 850 mm high, the
surface being made of horizontal slats spaced 30 mm apart so that locks
and second cuts can fall through.
  Skirting involves the removal of commercially inferior parts of the fleece.
It may be thought of as having two components. Primary skirting involves
the separation of a small part of every fleece and is related to anatomical
features such as crutch, legs, head and face. Secondary skirting involves
removal of wool from some fleeces because of environmental factors or faults.
In primary skirting, stained wool, sweaty edges, short shank wool, crutch
pieces, top knot and matted jowls are removed whereas wool severely affected
by seed or burr, black or coloured wool, necks and skin peices may be taken
out under secondary skirting. Much of this inferior wool is tossed aside
into bins and described as pieces, while shorter fragments which fall through
the table accumulate on the floor as locks. However, stained wool, coloured
wool, and skin pieces are segregated and each kept in separate containers
because of severe problems these components cause in normal processing.
  Skirting on rectangular tables is made easier if the fleece is thrown
so that it spreads over the surface of the table. The handler develops a
skill in picking up the fleece in such a way that it can be thrown upwards
and outwards over the table while keeping a hold on the wool from the rear
legs of the sheep. The fleece thus stretches out both lengthwise and widthwise
and lands on the table with the outer surface of the fleece uppermost. The
size and shape of the table normally requires two handlers to carry out
skirting, one operating along each side of the table.


	<h> Circular rotating wool tables </h>
	
In recent years, the continuing search for improved productivity has resulted
in a distinct move away from rectangular tables in small shearing sheds
to tables which are circular and able to revolve freely about a vertical
axis through the centre. Round rotating tables can be used efficiently by
a single wool handler to accomplish the same result as achieved on the
traditional rectangular table. In large shearing sheds of perhaps six or
more stands, circular tables may not provide the same benefits as in smaller
sheds because of the greater number of handlers available.
  There are three important modifications to technique when using round
rotating tables. They are commonly about 2200 mm in diameter, this dimension
arising from the need for a person of average height to be able to reach
the centre of the table without undue stretching. The surface area of these
tables is therefore less than that of rectangular tables. However the surface
area of round tables is more than double that of most sheep, although a
complaint sometimes heard when these tables are first introduced to a shed
is that they are not large enough. The first modification in technique
therefore is in the throwing of the fleece. It must not be thrown upwards
and outwards in order to stretch the fleece as much as for a rectangular
table. Rather it is thrown gently upwards and allowed to descend on to the
circular table with just enough outwards movement to enable the fleece to
open up and cover the table surface. Adjusting the throwing action may take
a little time to master, but experience with a variety of breeds of sheep
over a ten-year period has shown these tables to be satisfactory.
  The second modification to technique is that the wool handler must stand
still while skirting and allow the table to revolve as inferior portions
are removed from around the edges of the fleece. It is a functional requirement
of round rotating tables that the table top is of light construction and
able to revolve freely and easily. Working with the fingers along the edge
of the fleece provides adequate force to turn the table if it is correctly
made. The principal features of the fleece such as neck, points and breech
are identifiable, and skirting can proceed in an orderly and logical manner.
  The operator must resist the habit of walking around the table in the
initial stages, and it is inadvisable for two handlers to try and work on
the same table because of variations in speed of working and direction of
rotation of the table.  With sheds of three to six stands it is usual for more than one round table to be used.


</sample>
