By Cao Chong, G B Burns, P Jacklyn 3.  RESULT ANALYSIS 3.1  DIURNAL VARIATION  

The histograms of the percentage occurrence versus Greenwich Mean Time (UT)
and Magnetic Local Time (MLT) of all optical auroral activity and of optical
pulsating aurorae are shown in Figure 3. Both phenomena show a single
occurrence peak at Macquarie Island and a double peak for Davis. Optical
pulsations are a significantly smaller fraction of all optical auroral activity
at Davis than at Macquarie Island. Note that while there is considerable
variation in the percentage occurrence of pulsating aurorae with local time,
pulsating aurorae have been observed during all hours for which observations
have been made. This feature has been noted by others Iyengar and Shepherd
(1961), Paulson and Shepherd (1965, 1966a, 1966b), Campbell (1970) and
Cresswell (1972).

The occurrences of both optical and pulsating aurorae at Davis have two
peaks during the interval when observations are possible. The first maximum
of pulsating aurorae is at about 15 MLT in the early afternoon, and the
first maximum of optical aurorae is at about 14 MLT, earlier by an hour.
The second maximum occurs at 23 and 00 MLT for pulsating and optical aurorae
respectively. The two-maximum phenomenon was observed in the occurrence
of polar cap aurora by Lassen (1969). However, to the authors' knowledge
there has been no report of a double-peak phenomenon in the diurnal variation
of pulsating aurorae.

The first occurrence peak at Davis is nearly the same magnitude as the second.
The first maxima of the occurrences reach 65% for optical aurorae and 14.5%
for pulsating aurorae, and second maxima are 58% and 14.3% respectively.
The occurrence of optical aurorae at Davis is much higher than the occurrence
of pulsating aurorae. The occurrence minimum is near 18 MLT for pulsating
aurorae and near 20 MLT for optical aurorae.
  
Macquarie Island has only a single-peak in the occurrence of these phenomena.
The occurrence of auroral activity with no discernible pulsations (obtained
by subtraction of the two histograms presented) peaks at 27% just before
magnetic midnight, while pulsation activity reaches a maximum of 32% about
three hours later. This is consistent with pulsation activity being a post
auroral break-up phenomenon. The histogram of optical auroral activity reaches
a maximum occurrence of 48% about one hour after magnetic midnight. These
features are typical of a trans-auroral station.

Burns (1983) compared the percentage occurrence of pulsating aurorae at
Macquarie Island with the figures obtained by Brekke (1971) for Tromso
(67°N geomagnetic latitude). Although there are differences in the 
analysis procedures used on the two data sets the values are in good agreement.

From Figure 3, the percentage occurrence of optical aurora at Davis is higher
than that at Macquarie Isaland, and the percentage occurrence of pulsating
aurora is reversed. In addition, the pulsating aurora at Macquarie Island
is mainly a morning phenomenon, and at Davis an afternoon and near-midnight
phenomenon. One aspect contributing to this discrepancy may be the limited
hours during which it is possible to make optical observations at each station.
At Macquarie Island optical observations are possible from 19 MLT to 07
MLT while at Davis the range is 13 MLT to 05 MLT.

The variations in the percentage occurrence of `intense' optical auroral
activity and `intense' pulsating aurora against UT and MLT are shown in
Figure 4. The arbitrary definitions of `intense' optical auroral activity
and `intense' pulsating aurora have been described previously. Although
the occurrence variations at Davis still have the double-peak, the afternoon
peak is significantly reduced with respect to the midnight peak for both
`intense' optical auroral activity and `intense' pulsation activity.

Figure 4 indicates that at Macquarie Island the `intense' auroral events
peak near magnetic midnight. This is one hour earlier than the peak occurrence
of all optical auroral events as depicted in Figure 3. The `intense' pulsating
auroral events peak near 06 MLT. This is four hours later than the peak
occurrence of all pulsating auroral events as depicted in Figure 3. A plateau
region of occurrence between the hours 02 and 07 MLT is apparent. It is
a little later than in Figure 3. The delay of the `intense' optical pulsation
events relative to the optical pulsation events in general is evidence for
an increased energy and/or flux of the incident electrons towards the morning
hours.

 3.2  THE STUDY OF MOON-LIGHT INFLUENCES  

A separate percentage occurrence calculation was made for data collected
when the moon was not above the horizon at the observation station. This
is to determine the extent of `cloud and moon' screening of weak auroral
events. Tables 2 and 3 list the percentage occurrence of various auroral
phenomena for all the data, and for the data collected when the moon was
below the horizon (moon-free) at Davis and Macquarie Island respectively.

The Davis results show that the `Moon-Free Data' values are consistent with
the results obtained using all the data. Occasionally the `All Data' percentage
occurrences are a little higher than those of the `Moon-Free Data'. The
overall agreement between the occurrences of the `All Data' and `Moon-Free
Data' sets is however very good.

The maximum difference in the percentage occurrence of auroral activity
between the two data sets occurs between 19 and 20 UT. At this time the
`All Data' value is 49% and the `Moon-Free' value is 58%, a difference of
9%. All other values have a difference of less than 5%. The authors claim
an accuracy of 5% for values obtained from the `All Data' auroral activity
data set.

The Macquarie Island results show that the auroral activity percentages
are generally larger for the `Moon-Free Data' except near the edges of the
time span. The `Moon-Free' peak occurrence of 51% is 3% higher than the
`All Data' percentage between 13 and 14 UT. The average discrepancy between
the two data sets is 5%. That the `Moon-Free Data' percentages are higher
than the `All Data' percentages is consistent with events being missed due
to being swamped by larger amplitude `moon and cloud' fluctuations. The
hourly occurrence percentages of pulsating aurora are higher for the `Moon-Free
Data', but the differences are minor before 16 UT. From 16 to 19 UT the
differences are more substantial. This difference is in part due to a variation
in the level of auroral activity between the two data sets. This auroral
activity information was obtained from cosmic noise absorption data which
was available with the Macquarie Island data but not the Davis data.

The general feature of the optical pulsating aurora occurrences, namely
a plateau region between 13 and 19 UT, is maintained in the `Moon-Free Data'
values with the exception of the auroral activity percentages, which differ
by approximately 5%. The overall agreement between the `All Data' and
`Moon-Free Data' sets for Macquarie Island is good.

 3.3  THE VARIATION IN AURORAL OCCURRENCES WITH THE LEVEL OF MAGNETIC ACTIVITY  

The co-ordinates used in this research are the invariant colatitude, the
magnetic local time, and the magnetic disturbance level as indicated by
the Kp index. In order to investigate the variation in the occurrence of
various auroral phenomena with geomagnetic activity, the data obtained at
both stations were sorted into three groups on the basis of the Kp value
at the time of observation. The divisions made were       and   . For
convenience, we call these three groups the low, medium and high magnetic
activity groups. To show some characteristics of the optical pulsating aurora
occurrences, the data were further split to include the divisions    and   .
The histograms in Figures 5 and 6 show the results, for these data divisions,
for all optical aurorae and for optical pulsations. The Davis results in these 
figures show little dependence on magnetic activity. Similar results were 
obtained by Brekke and Pettersen (1971) at Spitzbergen (75.4°N 
geomagnetic latitude). Their observations were made during the winter 1967-68 
and 1968-69 with a photometer having a 10° field of view, and equipped 
with an interference filter of 200nm f.w.h.m. (full width at half maximum) 
covering the first negative    band at 427.8nm. The data they obtained were 
divided for high and low Kp. The curves, however, were not significantly 
different.

The result for optical aurora occurrences at Davis (Figure 5) shows a slight
dependence on magnetic activity. An increase in occurrence is associated
with increasing magnetic activity. However, for pulsating aurorae (Figure
6) there is no confirmed tendency. The    curve in the early afternoon
part is higher than for some other Kp levels. All Davis curves in these
figures maintain the double-peak and there is a discernible trough in the
afternoon hours.

A slight trend shown in the Davis data is that the early afternoon peak
(15 MLT) is associated with generally lower Kp values than the midnight
(23 MLT) peak. This is true for both auroral activity and pulsating auroral
activity. Figure 7 shows histograms of Kp levels associated with the  peaks for both auroral activity and pulsating auroral activity. For
auroral activity, for the time period 19-23 UT, 31% of events are associated
with a    while the value for the 10-13 UT peak is 11%. For pulsating
aurorae the corresponding figures are 31% and 15%.

The Macquarie Island results in Figures 5 and 6 show that all auroral
activities are significantly dependent on magnetic activity. The `All Aurora'
data of Macquarie Island in Figure 5 shows an increase in the time span
for which the optical activity is observed, and an increase in the percentage
occurrence, as the magnetic activity increases. The peak in auroral activity
for each of the three Kp divisions occurs between about 01 and 03 MLT. For
   optical auroral activity is negligible until 20 MLT, yet the
   data shows an occurrence of 33% in the hour before 20 MLT. A shift
in the occurrence of the peak, in optical auroral activity, from near magnetic
midnight towards the evening sector by two hours, occurs as the magnetic
activity increases. In all the data divisions for optical pulsating aurora
in Figure 6, the occurrence is minimal prior to 20 MLT. For    and
   the occurrence is significantly decreased, with respect to peak
occurrence values, after about 07 MLT. The times of the peak occurrence
are gradually shifted to later in the morning with increasing magnetic
activity. The values of the peak occurrence of pulsating aurora are strongly
increased as the level of magnetic activity increases. For Macquarie Island
data in the    division, the occurrence peak is 9.4% at about 02-03
MLT for the    division the occurrence peak is 37% at about 02-03 MLT 
and for    division the occurrence peak is 60% at about 03-04
MLT.

For    the occurrence rate averages above 50% for six hours in the
morning sector. For the    division the peak occurrence of 84% occurs
at about 06-07 MLT and the occurrence rate exceeds 50% for seven hours in
the morning sector.

The morphology of the authors' results is also illustrated in polar diagrams
in Figures 8(a), 8(b), 8(c) and 8(d) for four increasing levels of magnetic
activity. In these figures the occurrence data are presented with invariant
magnetic latitude and magnetic local time as the parameters. The double-peak
in the Davis data and the single-peak in the Macquarie Island data are readily
apparent.

Kvifte and Pettersen (1969, 1972) divide their data on pulsating aurora
into three groups according to the level of geomagnetic activity. The
observations were performed with four identical photometers at Tromso
(67°N, 117°E geomagnetic co-ordinates) during the winters of 
1967-68 and 1968-69. The photometers had a 10° field of view and 
measured the 427.8nm band emission. To separate the data, the sum of local K 
indices from 12 GMT to 12 GMT the following day was computed for every night 
that observations were obtained. The sum values limiting the three groups were 
set at 14 and 22. These observations show more pulsation activity at high 
magnetic activity than at low. Note that the Tromso data indicates that 
pulsating aurora does occur in the evening sector. Normally, the evening 
pulsation occurrence is low. For high magnetic activity a very low percentage 
of occurrence is recorded before magnetic midnight and very high values late 
in the night.

