By L C Kenna and P E Peploe 4. Measurements and Results  

  Details of the instrumentation used for acoustic and vibration
measurements are given in Appendix A.

 4.1 Vibration Measurements  

  Measurements of vibration were taken at four different
locations around the eastern revetment bay, for operation of
both F/A-18 and Mirage aircraft. The locations are illustrated
on Figs. 2 and 3. At each of these locations acceleration
levels were measured at several positions between ground level
and full height of the concrete walls. Figure 4 shows the
positions of the accelerometers on the north wall. Figure 5
shows the positions on the steel roof support. Figure 6 shows
the accelerometer positions used on the dividing wall between
the eastern and central bays; the block on which measurements
were taken was adjacent to the exhaust nozzles of the Aircraft.
(Note that accelerometer position B, at this location, was the
same position at which the consultant's vibration measurements
were taken). Figure 7 shows the accelerometer positions for
vibration measurements on the eastern wall: the accelerometers
were mounted along the centre of one block and situated 6
metres south of the junction of the block wall and the cast-
in-situ wall. Figure 7 also shows a position labelled M: at
this position, a microphone was inserted through the wall to
measure the sound pressure level to which the wall was exposed.
For practical and safety reasons, all accelerometer positions 
were on the outsides of the walls, relative to the position of 
the aircraft.

  The results of the measurements, in terms of the acceleration values 
at the various measured points, are shown in Tables 1 to 7 inclusive.

 4.2 Noise within the Revetment  

  Measurements of noise levels within the facility were taken at
the locations shown on Figs. 8 and 9, for the F/A-18 and
Mirage, respectively.

  For the F/A-18, measurements were taken for two power settings.
These were:-
(i) port engine on full afterburner, starboard engine at 80%
military power;

(ii) both engines on full afterburner.

  For the Mirage, measurements were taken for the power settings
maximum dry and full afterburner.

  In Fig.8, the positions shown as A and B are positions
representative of where ground crew are likely to be located
during engine run-ups. Position A is 3 metres forward of the
exhaust and 3 metres to the left of the aircraft centreline.
Measurement at this position indicates the level to which
ground crew may be exposed when examining the rear of the
aircraft. Position B is 12 metres forward of the exhaust and
7 metres to the left of the aircraft centreline. Ground crew
are located near this position when communicating with the
person in the cockpit controlling the aircraft engine. Position
C (which is the position marked M on Fig.7) is just below the
top of the wall, and 7 metres south of the start of the block
wall. This position was chosen to check the correlation between
acoustic and vibration measurements. Positions D and E on Fig.8
are both 6 metres south of the commencement of the block walls
on the two sides of the bay, and both 2 metres out from the
walls. These positions were measured in order to ascertain the
extent to which reverberation from the walls of the revetment
raises noise levels within the facility: because D is external
to the bays, it experiences no reflected sound other than that
reflected from the relatively-distant south wall, while E
receives reflected sound from several pathways.

  In Fig.9, positions A and B are the positions where ground crew
members may be located. Position A, on the wing, and 4.5 metres
forward of the exhaust was measured only for the maximum dry
power setting: this position is not occupied during run-ups at
full afterburner power. Position B is located 11 metres forward
of the exhaust and 7 metres to the left of the aircraft
centreline. Position C is described above for the F/A-18
measurements. Position D is at the aircraft tie-down position
in the central bay, position E is at the centre of the
uninstalled engine enclosure and position F is on the hardstand
area in front of that enclosure.

  The overall sound pressure levels, linear and A-weighted,
measured at these positions are tabulated on the tables
included in Figs. 8 and 9. For the critical positions from a
health and safety aspect, (positions A and B on both figures),
the spectrum of the noise is of importance for assessing the
adequacy of hearing protection. The one-third-octave spectra
at these positions, for the various combinations of aircraft
and power setting, are shown on Figs. 10, 11, 12 and 13.

  A further set of measurements were taken in the facility to
quantify the effect of reverberation on the noise exposures at
positions A and B for the F/A-18 aircraft. For this
measurement, a large loudspeaker capable of producing sound
down to very low frequencies, and thus able to simulate the
spectrum of jet engine noise was used. The loudspeaker was
situated at the exhaust nozzle position of the aircraft, on
the centreline of the revetment and driven with a pink noise
signal. The loudspeaker faced towards the rear of the
revetment. Measurements of sound pressure level were taken at
positions A and B. The loudspeaker was then moved to a
hardstand area out of the revetment, and well clear of any
reflecting walls. Measurements of sound pressure level were
taken at two positions situated identically, relative to the
loudspeaker, as positions A and B in the revetment had been.
The differences between the two corresponding pairs of
measurements illustrates the effects of reverberation within
the revetment on the sound levels at positions A and B. The
one-third-octave spectra for the two pairs of measurements are
shown on Fig.14.

 4.3 Environmental Noise  

  Sound levels in the environment surrounding the facility were
measured at three different points along each of five
directions from the facility, radiating from the nozzle
position of the aircraft. Measurements were taken for the F/A-
18 aircraft operating with port engine on full afterburner and
starboard engine at 80% military power. For the Mirage,
measurements were taken with the engine running at full
afterburner power. The locations of measurement positions have
been shown on Fig.15 and the A-weighted sound levels measured
at each position are shown on Figs. 16 and 17, for the F/A-18
and Mirage respectively.

  (It should be noted that the position 1.5 kilometres from the
facility, in direction E (35 degrees) is in the married
quarters area of the base).

  During these sound measurements, meteorological conditions were
also measured using a balloon to record this information at
various heights, and additional measurements were taken from
a ground meteorological station. The results of these
meteorological measurements are shown in Tables 11 and 12. The
average wind speed and direction for each of the periods when
the sound measurements were taken have been shown on the
figures containing the measurements results.

  In addition to the environmental measurements taken during
aircraft engine run-ups, measurements of the insertion loss of
the revetment structure were undertaken. The procedure involved
the use of two high-powered loudspeaker systems, one situated
at the aircraft position in the revetment, the other situated
external to the revetment bays. Measurements were taken, at
each environmental measuremental position, of the noise level
due to the in-revetment speaker, followed immediately by
measurements of the noise level of the out-of-revetment
speaker. The results are shown on Figs. 18 and 19, in units of
dBA, at each measurement position. Due to the weather
conditions and the volume of traffic (both aircraft and motor
vehicles), at some positions the sound from the loudspeaker was
not detectable above the ambient sound level.

 5. Discussion of Results 5.1 Vibration  

  Examination of the results shown in Tables 1 to 7 reveals that
for each measurement location on the concrete walls, the
maximum acceleration occurred at the tops of the walls.
Comparison of the measurements at different heights indicates
that the side T-block walls are rocking as a solid unit on
their plinths. However comparing the accelerations at the tops
of the side walls with the damage risk criterion of Fig.l shows
that the measured values fall below the range covered by the
criterion curve. Hence these walls are considered to be safe
from damage due to noise induced vibrations.

  For the block wall, which is exposed to buffeting from the
exhaust as well as to noise, the measurements indicate that
the wall is vibrating in a flexural mode, that is, the wall is
bending. The measured value of several peaks of acceleration
at the top of the wall, when plotted on the criterion curve
(see Fig.20), falls into, or close to, the region where damage
is possible. Our advice from the Vibration Group at the CSIRO
National Measurement Laboratories, who have examined these
results, is that the north wall of the facility requires
remedial treatment to avoid possible damage due to vibration.
However, any remedial treatment should not be considered in
isolation from other aspects: other results discussed below
have a bearing on what action may be taken concerning the north
wall.

  The results of vibration measurements undertaken on the steel
upright supporting the roof indicate no risk of vibration
causing damage. The effect of the vibration is to add a small
inertial load to the columns.

  Note that although accelerometers were located at positions
where maximum sound pressures and exhaust pressures (positions
1 and 4 respectively of Figs. 2 and 3) were anticipated there
may be other areas, not measured, in the revetment structure
where vibration levels exceed those shown in the results table.

 5.2 Noise within the Revetment 5.2.1 Auditory Effects  

  The sound levels shown on Figs. 8 and 9 indicate that hearing
protection is essential in virtually all parts of the facility
whenever an engine is running in any of the three bays, no
matter how short the exposure time may be.

  For the ground crews involved in the engine running, the sound
levels are sufficiently high, even with efficient ear
protection, that exposure times must be very limited if the
hearing conservation criterion is not to be exceeded. The
permissible exposure times, per day, can be calculated by
subtracting the attenuation spectrum of the ear protection from
the measured sound pressure levels of the aircraft noise
spectrum: the result is the spectrum of the noise reaching the
ears. This spectrum is then A-weighted and combined to yield the A-weighted
sound level at the ears, from which the permissible exposure
time is determined. (Because of the very strong low frequency
components present in the aircraft noise spectrum, the
simplified SLC80 procedure, which can normally be applied to
industrial noise levels to determine the adequacy of hearing
protection, does not yield accurate results).

  The procedure described above has been applied to the noise
spectra at the crew positions of the two aircraft, at both
power settings, for two types of hearing protection. The two
types of hearing protection are:-

(i) a combination of ear muffs (Protector type EML-45) and ear
plugs (E.A.R.);

(ii) heavy ear muffs (David Clark type E310) - these are one of 
the highest rating ear muffs in NAL's publication "Attenuation 
of Hearing Protectors" (4th edition).

  Both of these systems of hearing protection have been
evaluated at NAL according to the procedures of Australian
Standard AS1270-1975 "Hearing Protection Devices". Their nett
attenuations (mean minus standard deviation) are shown in Table
8.

  The results of applying the attenuations of these hearing
protectors to the measured noise spectra are tabulated in
Tables 9 and 10 for the F/A-18 and Mirage, respectively. The
tables show the A-weighted sound levels reaching the ears, and
the maximum permissible daily exposure time at each position.

  The results show that, using ear muffs, the maximum permissible
daily exposure times are impractically short. Hence all crew
working in the run-up facility should wear a combination of
earmuffs and ear plugs during engine running.

  Several additional points are of importance:-

(I) only one aircraft was undergoing ground running at the time when the measurements were taken.

