By Peter Cowan  

Crows lifted over the thin bushes. Settled to the stripped tree. On the
ground the bark lay twisted in long strips. The carcass near the edge of
the road was split, broken. Dry. Long ago dry. Come if you wish, he had
written. I shall be here.
  It seemed humorous now. A bit savage. A kind of joke no one was responsible
for. The flat ground to the left was rising, seemed to twist away in the
heat and hard glare. Nearer to the road, a ridge, sharp, red, the lip stained
in long white streaks, held like the breaking edge of a wave.
  
I had gone to see Sophia. Not knowing what to expect. I could not remember
anyone giving her a particular title, a role, aunt, cousin, one of these
she must have been. No memory remained of her appearance, only of a house
and single person in it. The sense of a person alone. But she too had written.
It was a small house, I had thought of something bigger, many rooms, now
the roadway cut in until there was no verge, only the strip of pavement.
Traffic crowded towards lights at the corner. She was very small, thin,
strong. Grey hair drawn back, smoothly, like that of a younger woman. Yet
I thought at once, had a kind of tiredness. Young man, she said, I can see
you do not remember me. She held the door. Why should you.
  The front room was very clean. Stripped, I was sure. It had once surely
held a great confusion of objects. Waiting now.
  She brought tea, and biscuits she had made herself. Her thin taut face.
Small, quick hands.
  As you see, I am fading quite comfortably.
  No, I said.
  Should dying be uncomfortable?
  No. No I didn't mean that.
  I'm sure you didn't. There is nothing I much care for any longer. Should
I like all this?
  What did the quick gesture of her thin hand take in. I don't know, I said.
It had become Dickensian. The small boy. Perched at bay. Indeed she could
well have been in the front row as that passionate voice ceased. To the
wild applause. Mr Dickens, please, your autograph. And though she was quite
without malice, I had become the small boy, inadequate, resentful. She,
a voice from the past.
  Your mother stopped visiting a long time ago. You may not remember.
  It was a long time ago. Half of my lifetime. At least. There seemed no
humour in her words. Time had perhaps shrunk in this house. She set her cup
neatly on the beatiful tray that I might have seen but did not recall. I wanted
to see you. I think you are almost the last.
  There did not seem any answer to that. Her thin face moved. A sort of
smile with precision.
  A preparation, she said.
  And whatever else we had tried to talk about while I ate her biscuits.
While you are here, she said, you should go and see Walter. If you can.
Do not be misled by him.
  Walter?
  My brother. As they would have it. Her smile this time with irony and
some faint bitterness I did not understand, but must be aware of.
  It is not far these days. A long way once. And I'm sure a long time since
ever I was there. But he may want to talk to you. 
  Distance, too, had shrunk in this house. My visit she accepted as if I
called in from a neighbouring suburb, a street away, rather than the other
side of a continent. Her letter had come before the other, after my mother's
death. I had not answered it.
  This place could have been yours, she said, as we stood at the door,
the traffic now building to the rush hour. But I'm afraid it has never been
mine. She lifted her hand as I reached the pavement, and closed the door.
The news of her death had come to me in England. The house was not left
to me, an expectation that had never occurred to me until she spoke. It
had belonged, all those years, to Walter. It was an odd visit, an impulse,
after I received her letter, and was on the way to England, a chance to
break the boredom and irritation of a long flight. Though it had not, in
the event, done that. The early convict hulks so plainly the prototype of
the jet liners. Even those were spared the endless clambering children.
A visit that owed something to an idea of seeing again that place where
I had grown up, and, without ever really thinking about it, expected to
remain. Looking down at a hot shadeless street from the window of a cheap
motel, I had not been able to pursue that. Perhaps in any case the intention
had been less strong than a curiosity at the complete lack of any trace
of these people in my mother's few enough belongings. Sophia, Walter, who
else? No papers or photographs. Only of my father. No voices were to reach
out from that past, it seemed. Otherwise I might have known Sophia in the
years when we had something to say to one another. It appeared I had been
steered away from my relatives.

Twelve thirty on the west coast. If the city radio laid claim to this as
some part of the coast. Thin bushes made dark patches like shade across
the ground, showed black along the top of the rise. Wattles. Or mulga. Neither
of which I could claim to recognise, despite the coloured spreads of endless
coffee tables. Perhaps they were all the same, some just drier, more brittle.
Curving slowly in an arc as the car travelled. Earlier there had been mining
towns about the backtopped road with its glitter of stubbies, bottles, cans,
small cartons like white everlastings, towns moving to new life as the price
of gold lifted, the shells of older buildings not too stark a comment. Beyond
the blacktop, long scars lying across the flats, the earth piled and abandoned,
raw scrapes along the dry creek beds, stones, bushes, brown and red earth
gashed back. Spoil from metal detectors and dozers no doubt. In the new
rush. Time would possibly soften them too. If it was not too late.
  Now ahead there were the black struts of a shaft, the earth held in clean
dumps, flat topped, like the ridge of land away to the left. There were
no buildings, a track half smoothed in dust, dead grass.
  From the old shaft-head patterns of shadow marked the ground, the car.
My water stained briefly the base of the solid upright. I could not imagine
why I had come. Into this mad time warp.

It had begun, or at least been decided, in the walled garden. Where no doubt
a lot more important concerns had begun. Mr Gladstone walking the paths.
Perhaps with Lord Aberdeen, possibly some official of State, or the powerful
of his party seeking to return yet again. Perhaps not for these things at
all, but in the half dark of evening with Catherine. Very far from those
other streets, the shadows beyond the lamps, figures half seen. Here light
glowing from the house whose windows overlooked the garden. A long way from
London, a retreat. The horses and carriage from the city. Lost one night
in a fog, near Hyde Park, with the Gladstones finding temporary lodgings,
to the amusement of their friends who thought Dollis Hill a hill too far.
But no locking the park gate at six o'clock for him. He would have been
surprised, it may have been, to know this would one day be named for him.
Perhaps even the gardens had been much the same. The purple and yellow borders
of the neat beds, the stocks, pink, white, delphiniums tall above them.
Carnations in gradations of colour beyond imagining. I had never been a
gardener. The old brick walls held, indeed may have been literally held,
in creepers. And of course the roses. A few here, and in special beds outside
the walls in the outer park, insolently luxurious. I did not see her at
first, coming from the narrow gate, walking slowly, unwillingly. I am not
meant for walking, she said, declining my voyages about the park. Her dark
hair loose, she had been back to the house. Mr Mason went home, she said.
So I left early. No one will notice.
  I moved the books, which she seemed unaware of, and might have sat on.
I think she was short-sighted. Those heavy eyes.
  By the delphiniums, I said. Those things, with that deep colour.
  They could be wallflowers. But I don't know about flowers.
  I never paid much attention to them myself until I came to this place.
  In our front garden at home there were two cement gnomes. Later someone
gave my father a cement Aborigine. I thought it was funny. They were loving
gnomes. Inside they hated each other's guts.
  The gnomes?
  The other gnomes. When they split up I was old enough to be glad. She
reached down, touching the deep brown petals very gently. I think it killed
my mother. The whole thing. I wonder sometimes if my father is still alive.
In America. I told you. Though I suspect he has reached your Boot Hill.
I think he'd like that. He was a great hater.
  Other relatives had been kinder, leaving her the house in the quiet street
with its lines of two-story semi-detached, set far enough away from the
through-road of Willesden and the older solid houses that had become tenements,
milk bottles and rubbish sprouting about their paths and doorways, empty
cartons kicked along the pavements. Dog turds. Not so far, perhaps, from
the Finchley Road where Dickens walked in the evenings, that great voice
declaiming his part in Wilkie Collins' play. To the alarm, it was said,
of residents. Nothing would alarm them now. Set back also from the railway
embankment that in summer discovered a thick green vegetation where children
might have played, once must have played, though they stayed inside now.
Heard from the pavements. Her street was close yet removed from these things,
almost without traffic, few cars, where you heard people walking, and the
occasional street trees threw a dirty felt of spent leaves across the pavement.
Where there was a kind of silence. Raised voices, yes. Occasionally the
day-long television. But somehow nothing. A peace.
  You don't have to go, she said. And do this thing.
  I have to go. Whether I do this thing, as you call it, or not. I can't
stay here.
  Yes.
  But no. It's a matter of nationality.
  Not that again. Look, there are so many people in this country illegally
they've given up bothering. They would never even look for you.
  With you as a cover, yes, it might work. A respectable girl in a solicitor's
office.
  A respectable solicitor's office.
  I do have to find this place, I said, and see whoever is there. Whatever
I do afterwards.
  You let it obsess you. But you could come back.
  Ellen liked to run separate problems together. Possibly a trick learned
from her solicitors. Confusing, if you tried to argue with her. She probably
did think my insistence that legally I could not stay indefinitely in England
was a quibble, but she ignored the fact that it would become very real if
I began to look for some kind of position. She was very forgiving, of all
save those gnomes whose seething guts she joined in hatred. I had thought
a good deal about going to this place I could barely remember, thought about
it sitting in the garden, half asleep sometimes. When she was not here.
But not, surely, letting it obsess me. As a child I had been there with
my mother, a long journey, by rail, then car. 

