<sample>
	<id> K06 </id>
	


	<note> 2004 words </note>
	


	<source> The life that I have led </source>
	


	<bl> By Serge Liberman </bl>
	


	<h> Fame: or the Rise and Fall of Benny Liner </h>
	

Benny Liner called me over to his table the moment I entered the Scheherazade.
At first, I didn't recognize him. He wore dark glasses and a scraggy beard
that appeared to have been stuck on by a third-rate Vaudevillian make-up
artist. But the balding head, the tapering face and large pointed nose were
his alone. A Cyrano was he who was thirty-five but looked forty and suffered
visibly from hay fever.
  We had first met in the third form. Together, after school, we had studied
algebra and trigonometry, had quizzed each other about the lakes of America
and the Kings of England, exchanged copies of Steinbeck and the juicier
Erskine Caldwell, and later became infatuated with Mary Unger, a wide-eyed
narrow-hipped lip-licking coquette of the first form. For four years, we
were friends. Then the university separated us. I set sights on medicine;
he went into architecture. He failed, turned to history and politics,
defaulting in these through soporific boredom and loss of interest, and
drifted, a rudderless vessel, into a pen-pushing position with the Department
of Taxation. Then I lost track of him until his name appeared in the papers
in connection with some scandal of which I had garnered a few disjointed
facts. I had been engaged in post-graduate study in Cincinatti at the height
of the affair and did not know the details.
  After the initial formalities, during which he ordered an iced-coffee
and vanilla slice for me, he took a pipe from his checkered waist-coat pocket,
stuffed it with cheap tobacco, lit the matted pulp with considerable sibilant
sucking and blew white billows of smoke into the air. His hands were white
and plump. They were also without hair.
  `Well, I suppose you've heard,' he said, draping an arm about a chair
and crossing one leg over the other in an attitude of indolence.
  `Heard what?,' I asked.
  `You are a diplomat, aren't you?,' he said.
  The smoke of his cheap tobacco did not blend too well with the coffee
before me. I waved it away. Seeing my gesture, he smothered his pipe with
the palm of his hand.
  `Forgive me. I'd forgotten. You never were a smoker, were you?,' he said.
  He paused, probed at some probable molar cavity with his tongue, then
resumed.
  `Well, I'm a celebrity, did you know? I've earned myself a small niche
in history. I wanted the sun; and, man, I got it. I sowed, and as I sowed
so did I reap. I was rubbed lusciously with the sweetest honey, but taste
instead of the most caustic tar.'
  When I furrowed my brow at this flow of cryptic aphorisms, Benny Liner
stopped speaking. He scratched at a patch of eczema at the root of his nose
and sniffed. He bit his upper lip and seemed disappointed.
  `So you really don't know? You really don't? - Do you have time then or
are your patients hustling you?'
  `It's my afternoon off. I have time,' I said.
  `Good. Drink your coffee slowly then.'
  I bit into my vanilla slice. Benny took a spray from his pocket, squeezed
it into his nostrils and sneezed. His relief, as he wiped his beard, was
immediate.
  `It all started for one reason alone,' he began. `It all started because
I wanted too much. I wanted - in one word - to be famous.'
  `Oh?', I said.
  `Listen. - Two years ago, I was a nobody, a Mr No-name, a Mr Zero, a Mr
Zilch. And it hurt. It hurt to realize that for all my thirty-three years,
I had achieved nothing important. Keats, you will remember, was already
dead at twenty-six; Einstein was the same age when he changed man's concept
of the universe. And then there were Newton, and Goethe, Mozart and Shelley,
all men of genius, famous before even their first grey hairs appeared. While
I, with half my life as good as over, all I had done was to ensure that
the people's tax returns were in order and that no-one was getting the better
of the Department. Surely - surely! - I had been destined for better things.
My parents had, after all, survived Europe. I myself had recovered from
meningitis, and once, when I was five, six perhaps, I was knocked down by
a truck and had crawled out with barely a scratch. There must have been
some greater purpose, some special mission for which I had been spared.
Surely that was a fair assumption, No?
  `Well, I had early on set my mind upon becoming a writer. And not merely
of books, of those potboilers and throwaways that fill to nausea the shelves
of every store like tins of tuna, but of sagas, chansons de geste, epics.
Epics! In the lower forms, you will remember, I was a good student and already
then I felt myself specially ear-marked for fame. My parents were not without
pride on my account, their friends praised me, my teachers commended my
talents, and everyone - everyone! - predicted success in whatever field
I chose. And like silver to greed, their praise naturally honed my conceit
all the more keenly. I filled my days with fancies. I sucked, as it were,
upon the lollipop of fame. Of fame! Fame! Fame! Wherever I walked, the thought
was always with me. Fame! Fame that made a man rise above his fellows, fame
that made other men raise their eyes in worship, fame that tantalised and
promised eternal life. Believe me, I could conceive of nothing grander.
  `From where I lived, I often walked to Ormond Hill. There, the sheer ecstasy
of creative thought soared its highest, for only from the heights can the
eye grasp the vastness of space, the expanse of time, only from the heights
can one comprehend the unity that underlies the innumerable tiny separate
and scattered splinters of human existence. There, on my Everest, I was
a giant amont dwarfs. Ship's lights, port lights and the stars winked at
each other. Waves rose and crashed against the parapet below. Brisk winds
sprang up from the sea and brought all manner of redolences to the nostrils
and all manner of tastes to the tongue as from far away came also the sounds
of motors and horns, sibilances and muffed echoes.
  `Sitting there alone on the crest of my Olympus, I heard voices, saw faces -
saw builders and destroyers, prostitutes and virgins; saw schoolboys and
shopgirls, titans of business and toothless larrikins; and white-coated
doctors and dog-collared priests, pimple-faced addicts and six-fingered
freaks, and, in a hubbub as if from Babel come, they were whistling and
shouting, taunting and swearing; and they were hissing and bellowing, and
shrilling and shrieking. And as I watched and listened and contemplated
that which, as it were, came before mind's eye, as in that wake I took it
all in, I had a vision. They were bound in time, all those folk, they were
bound by time - that was clear - yet were they simultaneously timeless.
The present was a mere blinking, yet did even this mirror the eternal. For
that which men were now, that had they always been, and that would they
forever be; as they acted now, so had they always acted, and so would they
always act; what they lived for now, for that had they always lived, and
for that would they forever live. We had become modern, yes, we were masters
- or servants perhaps - of cars and electricity, television, computers and
all mod cons; our music, literature, architecture, engineering, art, one
could argue, had advanced in diversity, versatility, technique and maybe
in sophistication; but at the nitty-gritty level of human affairs, nothing
- nothing - ever truly changed. Now, as always, a bronchitic child spent
sleepless nights while its mother fretted, old men raged against the night
and women everywhere sobbed and bit their lips over illness, disaster and
death, all these recurring, all these recurring, as did carnivals and terror,
rites of passage and rituals of grief, as did beauty and saintliness and
malice and waste and splendour and decrepitude. All these, from Eden to
the Black Death even to the present day; and from Cornwall to Melbourne
to Japan. The eternal, the infinite and the universal, each in the merest
moment caught, each in the weest trifle identified.
  `This, then, this was the world as I saw it. And none, our age being short
on great minds, had in our own time yet fully captured the vision. Nor -
so did I believe - had anyone yet effectively caught the gaping contrast
between the heedless flow of time and the flitting evanescence of existence
which both made meaningless and pathetic all our fretting, our ambitions,
our very lives, yet against this, despite all this, charged every man and
woman alive ever to create meaning, even to invent it if need be, for no
other world but this could they ever know, and, if they were to fulfil the
best of all that lay within them, only here, only now, in this life only
could they hope to do so.'
  Benny paused. He had been probing at air and now inverted his finger towards
the table which, in turn, he took to prodding for emphasis.
  `Both to present the world as I saw it and to fire others to give of their
best - in other words, to inspire and excite and to elevate - these became
my dual ambitions as I sat on Ormond Hill. And on such nights, I hurried
home, intoxicated. My imagination burned. Not bothering to take off my jacket,
I would sit down at my desk, take reams of paper from a drawer and begin
to write. Words streamed from my pen; the ink was a waterfall. I breathed
life into people, all manner of folk - professors, inebriates and seedy
crows, and children, wastrels, braggarts and cretins. In those hours, believe
me, which lasted well into the night, I was exhilarated, alight, alive,
and it was in a state of ecstasy that finally I would fall asleep.
  `But o, were such sleep, such sleep to last forever!
  `In the mornings I read again the sheets I had filled with ink during
the night. Gremlins, I discovered, mischevous sprites inhabited my drawers.
For, in the more sober light of day, all I found of all my ecstasy were
stilted prose, hollow phrases, a cornucopia of platitudes and, worst of
all, not characters alive who moved and thought and felt but caricatures
who didn't in the least bit breathe. How it hurt! Believe me! How it pained!
I wanted to give up, give it all up a hundred times. But to give up hurt
even more than to continue, for the prospect of mediocrity and with it the
dread of oblivion were alike past bearing; and I knew that, whatever the
pain, whatever the agonising, the coming evening I should try again.'
  Benny Liner rapped his pipe against his hand. A sprinkling of charred
tobacco powdered the table. His nose twitched. He sniffed. Then he sneezed.
  Wiping his beard again, he asked, `Can I buy you another coffee?'
  `My turn,' I said, calling over the waiter.
  `I am telling the story,' he replied. `I'll also pay for your patience.'
  He pushed the sugarbowl towards me even before the coffee had arrived.
`I'll have another cup later,' he said and coughed into his plump white
palm.
  `One day,' he resumed, `in the hold of a new idea, I left the office in
a hurry. The day was cold and bleak, the kind in which icicles hang from
walls. The wind blew viciously and the sky was menacing. People everywhere
turned up their collars. The air tasted salty. And then, and then, the storm
broke. Caught in the downpour, I ran for shelter in the doorway of a bookstore.
Other people pushed past me. They were wet.


</sample>
