By Blanche D'Alpuget TWELVE  

  Alice tottered a bit when she stepped back from her front door, laughing
and clapping her hands.
  "Thy hair is as a flock of goats that cometh down from Gilead! Oh, let
me look at you. The screenwriter!"
  For Danielle it was always amazing to connect Alice with her age, to see
her shaky on her legs as a woman of eighty-five had a right to be, for she
was such a girlish creature, her eyes so bright with communication, her
voice so gay - and with all that she had a quality of knowing, of knowledge
of the goals of life. She looked a schoolgirl nine hundred years old.
  Danielle thought: She brings out in me the urge, almost uterine, to
exaggerate; to make everything brighter and more dramatic.
  "My God, Alice! This place smells like a coal mine," she said, and they
went off into peals of laughter.
  "The wicked landlady will not fix the gas for me. I'll go up in a fireball
one day. And the prime minister will blame the PLO."
  "There'll be summary vengeance."
  "Yes. A couple of planes will whiz up to Lebanon and bomb some camp."
  They deflated.
  "You've come at a sorry time," Alice said. "I didn't think I'd live to
see ..."
  Chastened, she looked at the floor. - We've lost it all so quickly. All
the fun of the 1930s and of the fifties and sixties has gone. Israel was
"God and us" in those days.
  "You're limping," she said. "You mustn't fall sick here."
  She led Danielle into the kitchen where the reek of gas hammered their
noses until the kettle was boiled for tea, and the stove could be turned
off. Alice had herbal ointment for foot blisters and made Danielle remove
her soft red leather walking boots, red leg warmers, and the socks with
toe pockets.
  "Toed socks!" she said. "I invented them, I believe, for my trip to Moscow
in 1925. I knew I was going to freeze and wouldn't be able to wash."
  Danielle looked around at the leaky stove, the refrigerator that made
digestive noises, the cold-water sink. Alice saved pieces of string and
plastic bags; they were heaped on a peg behind the door; she had breadcrusts
stored in a plastic container and bean sprouts growing feebly in a jar by
the window. Danielle wondered if she were getting enough to eat.
  "It's not Darling Point, with harbor views," Alice said. She had sold
everything when she turned sixty-five and run off to Israel again. After
a while snapshots had arrived: Alice outside the children's house of the
kibbutz; milking a cow. A note said, "When I came here in 1930 it was
half-swamp and we slept in tents. The achievement!" Looking at the frugality
of her existence in Jerusalem Danielle wondered at the ends of life, the
loose fringes to its garment: Miss Sadler - suffragette, pacifist, Communist
fellow-traveler, Zionist, abortion-law reformer, feminist radical, member
of Amnesty International, and the Voluntary Euthanasia Society. She had
wanted to save the world. Now she saved plastic bags. And she seemed happier
than ever.
  "Since you're getting on a bit ..." she said tentatively. Alice was tottering
about the kitchen, refusing help with the tea things. She gave a snort.
  "You think I should return to Australia? Yes. It would be more comfortable."
There was gaiety in her eyes. "But, my dear, the spirit. At my age, it's
the spirit."
  "Won't it travel?"
  "It does not need to. It's contented everywhere. Especially here."
  They went to the parlor where there was an electric heater and a blue
woolen curtain enclosing the room's warmth. Danielle was unwilling to yield
up her cheerfulness, but as she settled herself on the settee beside a
pile of Listener magazines she experienced a sudden thud, as if her armor
had crashed to the ground. Without intending to she began relating her
problems: Eleazar was her big chance, but she would not be paid much until
the script was complete (and accepted), so she had gone into debt to keep
herself going: "I've had to put up my house in Avalon as collateral." There
were difficulties with the producer, who wanted her to move to Los Angeles,
but she could not leave Katherine alone in Sydney during her first year
at university. Then there was the dog. "The dreadful woman from whom I bought
the house, Mrs. Wellsmore, is staying in it while I'm away, minding Emma.
She has a diet of gin, cigarettes, and aspirin, and I expect she smokes
in bed."
  Alice listened to the undercurrent, to Danielle's voice saying, "I've
reached a crossroads - and I'm lost." A few months ago her letters had sounded
so confident; she had announced: I'm through with men! Radical celibacy
equals peace of mind.
  A deep breath turned into a sigh. "The worst problem is I think I've fallen
in love with the producer-director. He's a crook."
  Alice folded her hands and closed her eyes. There was some weakness in
Danielle's nature that drew her to tainted men - including Patrick, for
whom she'd grieved for years, although he was a drunk and unfaithful. As
a child there had been an incident with one of Bonny's admirers. Of course,
living alone with her mother, who was more or less a geisha ... Rich men
paid the rent and the school fees for Bonny, who was a real beauty and as
high-handed as a duchess, her haughtiness that of a woman made bitter when
still young. The mother had been kept in furs and the daughter in trifles
like Swiss watches. But it was always on the edge, and the girl had been
scarred: she looked for God in men, someone to save her.
  "You told me you were never going to fall in love again, after - what
was his name? - the last one?"
  "James." Danielle's voice was glum. She'd helped James get a lead role
in a production of Arturo Ui, whereupon he'd turned layabout, and wouldn't
help with the shopping.
  Sipping the hot clear tea, Alice contemplated that aspect of women that
whispers, "You're not really good enough; you'll never achieve what you
could if you were a man." The serpent says, "But if you love a man, if you
become his soul for him, you can guide him to happiness - and that will
be an achievement." She had listened to its seductive murmur for more than
sixty years.
  Danielle, also sipping tea, pictured Bennie - he with the Filipino servant,
he who ate all his meals in restaurants, who drove a white Corniche (discounted
at $40,000 a year, thanks to the tax laws of California), Bennie Kidron:
supermarket shopping?
  "Is he a real crook?"
  "He has a certain reputation in Los Angeles. He had money troubles after
his partner died in a helicopter accident. The partner, Raphael Schultz,
was the " - she grimaced - "genius auter, as they say. He was famous in
the seventies for low-budget, cult movies." Kidron was the salesman of the
team; he raised the money, he did deals. "Now he wants to be a director.
I doubt if he could direct traffic - and he's hired me because he needs
a writer who will feed him every line. But he's full of charm, when it suits
him. And always full of cheek." Bennie had said, "I'm gonna make fifteen,
twenty million out of this. I need fifteen." What he needed it for was not
clear. Danielle was now sitting in silence, realizing she was already deeply
in conspiracy with Bennie, that her discretion about his greed sealed it
like a vow.
  There was a delicate query in Alice's raised eyebrows.
  "We're not lovers!" she replied quickly. "Nor does he give the slightest
sign of finding me interesting."
  So much the worse, Alice thought.
  Alice had a habit of punctuating conversations with periods of quiet during
which she sat with her eyes closed. When she opened them it was the signal
to begin a fresh topic. Danielle enjoyed the orderliness this gave, but
she dreaded what had to come next: her father. 
  "I tried to find his telephone number ..."
  "You shall find it, my dear. You have to. You knew you had to return to
Jerusalem, and now that you're here you know you must find him. Your mind
will never have peace until you do. You told me that yourself, once."
  "But it's not in the Hebrew phone book."
  Alice thought that a poor excuse. Danielle should know how small Jerusalem
was, that "everybody knows everybody." There were invisible structures,
like the crystalline lattice in a saturated solution. All the pre-Independence
people knew each other; all the German-speakers; all the Anglophones; the
Second Aliya; the Herut people. The country was a laminate of clans.
  "He's religiously - how that word is misused - active," Alice added. "My
born-again Christian girls know of him." And David had told her: Professor
Garin, retired, was still as troublesome as he ever had been since 1948
when his crusading against the Arabs had not been recognized for what it
was: a form of madness. It was restricted, however, to a single area of
his mind so that Garin had been able to continue his research, begun under
the British who had sent him to Palestine, and had attained the status of
professor in the medical school where his work on viruses had been outstanding.
For thirty years he had been writing pamphlets calling for the rebuilding
of the Temple (prophecy said that on its third building the Temple could
not be destroyed). Alice had seen them occasionally. They usually began
with the motto "He who rules Jerusalem rules Israel, and he who rules the
Temple Mount rules Jerusalem." Since 1967 Garin's pamphlets had been taken
more seriously. She gazed at Danielle, whose face had become small and anxious
with questions beneath its rug of copper hair.
  "He's considered a phophet, by some. He's part of the shadow spreading
over this country - it's a fearful thing." The Christian girls spoke of
Satan's wing darkening the Jerusalem sky, but they meant something different:
they prayed for Israel to bomb Damascus, "for Damascus shall be in heaps,"
the Bible said. When they mentioned Islam they said "Satan."
  "I wasn't prepared for something I saw at the airport," Danielle said.
"What I can only describe as racial tension between some European Israelis
and some Middle Eastern ones."
  "The blacks! My dear, that's what the Sephardim are called. They're the
dogsbodies - Arabs aside - and they're blamed for everything. And, you know,
I think it suits -" The doorbell rang. "That will be Suzie from the home-help
agency. She'll know how to find Garin."
  The young woman who followed Alice back into the parlor was so thin Danielle
guessed she suffered from anorexia nervosa. She had pretty dark hair and
eyes, but there was something feral in her expression; she looked uncertain,
almost suspicious, as she stood close to the blue woolen curtain, her glance
directed down over her long Indian cotton dress, thick maroon stockings,
and clumpy sandals.
  "This is Marilyn, who's going to clean for me today because Suzie, who
normally comes, has a cold."
  In Danielle's warm hand Marilyn's fingers were icy and all bones.
  "You're freezing!"
  Both recoiled.
  There was a hint of perverse pleasure in the girl's expression: "I lost
my gloves yesterday," she said. "But Jesus will send me another pair," and
Danielle realized there was a challenge thrown at her from Marilyn's eyes.
She thought: scavenger's eyes.
  Alice had gone to make more tea. When she returned she found them watching
each other as warily as strange cats. She could see what Danielle was thinking:
that Marilyn needed a bath. She had folded the skirts of her dowdy cotton
dress over her knees in a manner suggesting that invisible men, across the
room, were leering at them; her hair, in particular, did smell unwashed,
especially alongside Danielle, who would as soon go out without wearing
scent as Alice would without wearing her beret. 

