A father's story of a lost child By Bruce Williams  

What is it? Kathryn again, one of her dreams. Nuisance. Does she have to
scream like that? Time after time.
  It's cold out of bed. My toes home-in on solid objects in the dark with
uncanny accuracy. And the screaming! Stop it for god's sake. I'll be there,
I'll be there.
  I over-run the door and have to feel my way back. Fumble on the wrong
side for the handle, pull on it instead of push. You'd think a bloke would
know his own house. Does she have to scream like that? It's only a dream.
  "It's only a dream honey, only a dream."
  The room is lit for no reason and goes back to black. In the instant I
see the bed, made-up and flat, three months empty, my books on the shelf.
I hear for the first time the long, peeling screech of storm-rain on the
tin roof.
  I'd gone to bed with a quiet mind, sure all this was at an end. The heavy
rumble rolls through me, fills my head, rolling in my head. The walls move.

As a child Kathryn slept a great deal. She was slow learning to talk, though
she had sharp ears, and loved the sound of running water. She'd appear out
of nowhere when a tap was turned on, and stare at the stream as if it were
as clear as her eyes, not brown and brackish from the bore, or tin-tasting
and stale from the tank after pumping. It wasn't until she was four that
she was allowed to turn on a tap herself: a responsibility she took on
with extreme gravity. When she was five, it rained.
  The days were marked as the hills changed color. In the morning, red,
like light through skin, fading to a dull rust by noon, then a hazy, sad
blue against the amethyst sky of evening. An uneven shade would then push
its way through the streets and dirt driveways, over the houses of the little
town where Kathryn was born.
  Occasionally there was a forecast for rain. We got to thinking the weather
stations would throw in a shower every six months or so to cheer us up -
or more likely to keep us there so there'd be someone for them to forecast
to. And rain would fall: fifty miles east, a stone's throw west - anywhere
but on our little dust-heap where we thought it really mattered.
  When it finally did rain, when Kathryn was five, even the dogs went wild,
and a couple shot through. Funnily enough, with all the barking and the
noise, I didn't notice until she came in, soaked and shivering. I can still
see her, can always see her, standing in the doorway, backed by the grey
smear of falling rain, with the thin, sweet mist rising against it.
  I'd never thought to teach her about rain. How would you? She'd heard
about it, I know that for a fact. I went through all the books I'd read
her, and nearly half of them made mention of rain. It wasn't my fault.
  Kathryn stood in the doorway, quiet at first, though uneasy within the
silence. Her eyes looked nowhere. Held out her hands, and I took them and
pulled her to me. I hugged her until I felt the chill creep through my clothes.
She was shivering, and I shivered. Kathryn was crying, then spoke in a low
voice, a grown-up whisper, asking for her mother, long-gone. It hurt me
that, crying for her. Strange the grudges you bear, and the things you forgive.

"Guess what?"
  "What?"
  "I bet you can see the sea from the top of that tree up there."
  "I bet you can too."
  "It's over there isn't it," pointing with a thrust of her arm between
another spindly tree and a neighbour's distant chimney.
  "Dead right, honey," and it was.
  "I bet you can see it from up there."
  "I bet you can too."
  She ran off, and I went inside to put things in cupboards and check the
gas and the lights.
  It had been no mean feat getting a transfer from that hole, my one-man
school: a good few years of forms and phone-calls. A dust bowl is no place
to bring up a child. Surprising you have to learn a thing like that, but
finally I did.
  "Daddy, Dad, guess what?"
  "You saw the sea." She couldn't possibly have seen the sea.
  "No, no. No! We've got a river!"
  "What sort of river?"
  "Oh, you know ... a river with water. And a herd of them swans too. They
flew away, but they'll come back won't they. Come on, look," she said, tugging
at my belt, "Come on, look. Come on, Dad."
  It wasn't even a decent sized creek, but it bubbled nicely and was banked
with soft moss and the occasional willow. All the best creeky things. In
an area where the water widened and slowed, there was a blurred spot of
sediment constantly turning over: a spring where water from underground
came up to meet the stream in the living air. This caught her attention,
and her tugging hand slackened and let go.
  I hadn't noticed the spring when I was there last to look the place over,
nor the smell. There was a slight bad smell, a sulphur smell. Not enough
to really bother you in the moving air tasting of grass and trees, but
noticeable. It struck me as strange that I hadn't noticed it the first time.
  The creek had decided me on the place. It seemed to speak Kathryn's name.
I knew she'd love it, and guessed at the games she'd play: racing sticks
down rapids, catching things and letting them go, expeditions up the Congo
and Nile. My own little River-Queen coming home crying because she'd fallen
in. But she never came back crying from that creek, the little pool.
  After the first excitement of a new home, after no more than a week or
so, my daughter quietened down to normal. I used to think she would have
made a good Victorian: she had a natural inclination to speak only when
spoken to. Her new teacher liked her.
  We'd come home from school, change and wash, and part ways - she to her
dream river, and I to my desk and later the kitchen. Our paths would converge
at dinner. What do you say to children? "Have a nice day at the Congo dear?"
We both liked bed early.
  "Have a nice day at the Congo dear?"
  "What?"
  "Pardon!"
  "What?"
  "Salt and pepper?"
  "No thanks ... Dad? Where does the river go?"
  "What, has it been hiding?"
  "Don't be silly. The water doesn't come back does it. It goes down the
hill, and it can't get back up can it."
  "No. It's always different water."
  "It tastes the same, but."
  "It tastes like water." She didn't look convinced.
  "Where does the water go?"
  "To the sea. It goes into the sea, and then it becomes the sea."
  "I don't think it should. It's still the water from our river isn't it.
The sea tastes different, doesn't it."
  "Yes, it's the salt."
  "Aren't there rivers in the sea?"
  "I suppose there are, sort of."
  "And our river's in the sea?"
  "Yes honey," Kathryn looked solemnly into her plate. "Your dinner will
get cold."
  It's hard getting used to a new school, a new way of teaching: more children,
and all the same age. For the first time Kathryn wasn't in my class. I'd
see her across the asphalt, skipping, tossing a yo-yo, punching boys: the
time-honored occupations of youth. I was tired getting home. The preparations
and the cooking seemed to take longer. The air was heavier, is heavier,
than in the dusty town where Kathryn was born: thicker with water. I didn't
spend a lot of time with her. Sending her out to play was easy. She was
always happy to go.
  Kathryn also seemed to tire more easily, or at least she was tired more
often. Perhaps her play had become more vigorous. The new school may have
been more demanding on us both. More and more often she was silent at dinner.
  She seemed to seek sleep as a refuge, which worried me a little, because
she soon began to suffer from dreams. It became a routine. Late, but before
dawn, she'd wake up crying, screaming sometimes. I'd rush in and, with a
mixture of sympathy and annoyance, make what I'd assumed to be comforting
goo-goo noises until she quietened herself down. When she was quiet, she'd
look confused at me, almost in reproach, as if wondering why I'd come in
to disturb her rest. I asked once if she'd like to sleep with a light. She
said a simple "No" which made me feel foolish. I don't believe she was the
least afraid of the dark.
  One week-day morning - it must have been Tuesday, sports day - Kathryn
was washing in the bathroom. She'd been in a while, and I needed a shave.
  "Can I come in?" I said for some reason, turning the handle.
  I stepped in, and had to catch myself up, grabbing at the door-handle.
The tiles were under a thin sheet of water. Steadying myself, I saw Kathryn
standing at the sink. The soap was in her near hand at her side. The other
hand was on the basin edge. She was staring blank-faced at the tap running,
the water overflowing. I don't think I'll ever lose my abhorrence of wasted
water.
  "Kathryn! You stupid girl!" and with more ferocity than I'd intended,
glared at her and turned off the tap.
  She looked up at me startled, almost panicked, as if she too had slipped
suddenly and caught herself without thinking. She looked at me as if waiting
for her mind to catch up with her body.
  Looking at her face, thinking these things, I didn't notice her reach
into the water and pull out the plug. The drain's gurgle and suck somehow
robbed the situation of the significance it had begun to take on.
  "Don't do that Kathryn. Open the window."
  "Yes Dad. Do you know where my sports socks are?"
  "If they're not in your drawer, they must be in the wash. You'll have
to wear your grey ones."
  I don't quite know how it happened, but in the final term I got roped
into the annual school production. One in a long and noble tradition of
pre-pubescent Pirates of Penzance. I had less and less time for her, and
she seemed to have less need of me. We'd hardly have seen each other at
all if not for her nightmares. The world's a small one for a busy man -
I told myself.

The year went on, and the weather became continuously humid and hot. It
always seemed on the verge of rain, whether or not the sky was clouded.
  One afternoon the clouds were piling up, coming in from the sea. The
pre-storm agitation hit me, and I began to wonder what Kathryn was doing.
  For some reason these things affect you, the state of the weather. When
the air's on the verge, everything seems in need of haste. I almost ran
to the little creek, to the pool that was her favorite. By that time the
wind was stronger - still hot, but carrying the edge of the cold to come.
The clouds were black at the line of hills, swelling white at the crest,
like great waves. 
  I had to catch my breath when I reached Kathryn's pool, leaning with my
hand against the crusted willow bark which had the look of dry, eroded earth.
Kathryn had been swimming. Her clothes lay on the bank.
  The air was heavy under the willow, and the exertion had tired me more
than I'd thought. I looked at my daughter from within a growing dizziness.

