<sample>
	<id> K29 </id>
	


	<note> 2003 words </note>
	


	<source> Ghoul Days and Other Stories</source>
	


	<h> Avidya and the Atman </h>
	


	<bl> By Kenneth Simpson </bl>
	

    Doug McNab had returned to his flat after driving his sweetheart home.
I knew his movements because whenever he drove in or out of the drive he
tooted, not only to warn any approaching pedestrians that they were about
to be run over but to let everyone know that Doug was arriving or Doug was
leaving.  My flat was above his and I had developed my opinion of his
personality from these and other habits that he had, metaphorically, thrust
under my nose.
    That evening Doug and his sweetheart had walked on the beach holding
hands in the best tradition of young lover triumphant at the end of a
wide-screen epic: The hero and heroine silhouetted against the setting sun,
walking barefoot by the water's edge, their footprints melting and finally
vanishing, washed by slippery wavelets.
    When I first met him I was impressed by his mediocrity.  There seemed
to be no depth to his personality.  His conversation was banal and strewn
with cliches.  It was a relief to escape and have myself for company.
    From that first joyless meeting I couldn't seem to avoid Doug.  Invariably
his movements coincided with mine*mind.  He would pop out unexpectedly
from diverse places: from underneath my stairs, his garage, shrubbery,
shop doorways, and from the sea, dripping, to hover disconcertingly over
me while I sunbathed.  If I wasn't with him or unable to see him I could
always hear him since, apart from other distracting noises, he was liable
to shout greetings from one end of the block of flats to someone at the
other end, and he was no respecter*respector of doors which he slammed 
uncompromisingly.
    Needless to say our relationship didn't mature.  I came no nearer to
knowing Doug and apparently he had no desire to plumb my depths.  Commonplace
repetitious words were our only means of communication.  I tried without
success to raise our level of intercourse above the monotonous and mediocre.
A pet dog would have been more responsive.
    I attributed Doug's apparent satisfaction with the situation to the
fact that he had contrived its creation.  My dissatisfaction was due in
part to my role as a pawn in a drama I knew nothing about.  Almost as a
means of self-defence I began to analyse Doug's behaviour.  I attempted
to probe beneath the surface of his personality.  However, by doing so,
I inflated him out of all proportion so that he developed gradually into
a kind of omnipresent incubus:  corporally, aurally and mentally.
    Irritation was, I suppose, my dominant feeling towards Doug but it was
liable to swing from tolerance at one extreme to contempt at the other.
    I came to realize that beneath the surface of the mind a subtle
undercurrent flowed, compared with which the surface was transparent as
a muddy pool.
    Beneath the surface, carried by the current, I translated Doug's sounds
and actions into a language based on suppositions, intuition and probabilities.
    I recalled that first meeting and revived a dormant impression.  It was odd 
but Doug had appeared to be introducing himself to himself, rather than to me, 
as if verifying his identity through me.  I was then, and had remained, a 
computer that accepted his information, processed it and finally emmitted the 
result via a particular wave-length beyond which, at either extreme, my 
response became scrambled and meaningless due to Doug's mental censoring 
apparatus.  It was really a form of closed circuit, self-imposed brain-washing.
    Another clue was the careful, almost scripted way he spoke, as though
he were afraid of letting something slip out that might compromise him.
There was a slight but definite emphasis to his remarks, not in an inflexible
or bombastic vein but rather an excess of forced joviality or a `tentatively
determined' delivery that suggested he was afraid of being contradicted.
He introduced his exploits into a conversation somewhat slyly, matter-of-factly
and with a degree of pseudo-humility that he probably meant to be disarming.
    I also conjured up a mental picture of Doug.  It was an unremarkable
image of a medium sized, lean, wiry old man; balding but with long hair
at the back, white bushy sideburns and a half-smile that suggested cunning,
confidence, and a sense of humour which he didn't possess.  The less
noticeable, more subtle trait was his self-consciousness.  He never looked
abstracted; he always appeared to be alert and there was a staginess about
his movements like the posing of an actor never off the stage.
    The sound of pop music, loud and urgent like a howling child, invaded
my flat.  I called out, &quot;I know you're a swinger, Doug.  You don't have
to convince me, so turn it down.&quot;  Nothing happened of course.  He wouldn't
have heard me.  I closed the windows and turned on a fan.
    That night I dreamt I was an audience oppressed by demanding Dougs;
young middle-aged and old Dougs, all with the one-and-only face I knew so
well, frolicking in the water, turning into a school of fish, then a submarine
with me on board that shot from the water like a rocket to become a flying
fish soaring up and then landing with a thud to slide along the deck of
a magnificent ocean liner where Doug was captain, chief-engineer, mate,
crew, all the passengers and even the ship ... I woke with relief in a room
free of Dougs.
    It was Sunday morning.  After breakfast I walked to the back of the
beach to preview the day.  I sucked in as much salty air as possible and
surveyed the scene.  Some gulls were wheeling above me.  The sky was blue
and cloudless.  A few boats were scattered near the horizon.  A speedboat
towed a skier across the river mouth to the north, and to the south, where
the bay began to curve, I noticed a small figure running along the sand
by the water's edge.
    I think I knew who it was even before I could identify him.  It was
Doug without a doubt.  He glanced towards me then accelerated to finish
full of running in line with me as though I were the finishing post.
    He waved casually in my direction, pulled his tracksuit top over his
head, stepped out of his shorts and sprinted enthusiastically towards the
sea.
    He cavorted about energetically in the water like a drunken porpoise
pretending to swim the butterfly, but in the shallows where his feet could
reach the sand.  I even clapped him but I don't think he noticed.
    Doug's interpretation of other people's opinion of him was the one which
he had created and accepted as reality, so not only had he assumed a fantastic
opinion of himself but he had indoctrinated others with the same opinion
by letting them know, verbally and by example, what their opinion of him
should be.
    &quot;God, that was good,&quot; he said. &quot;I feel like a new man every day.&quot;
    His voice was loud and hearty.  I felt he was shoving his personality
down my throat and forcing me to swallow it, leaving the residue - the reality-
untouched and inviolable.  It was like a smokescreen designed to hide something
he considered fragile and precious.   
    &quot;How are you?&quot; he asked me.
    &quot;Fine,&quot; I replied, but the question had irritated me. He didn't care how I
was. It was his usual, slightly patronizing display of magnaminity, a gambit he
used to bring me into range so that he could recharge his batteries by draining
me.
    &quot;How are you?&quot; I countered, but as I expected he evaded the question.
    &quot;It's a great day,&quot; he said instead, grinning with self-satisfaction
and investing his words with an intimate quality so that the sun seemed
to shine personally for him.
    &quot;Where do you get all that energy from?&quot; I asked him, looking at his
brown, self-confident face.
    &quot;I've always had it,&quot; he said casually and smiled contentedly. &quot;I suppose
I was born with it.&quot;
    That and showing off, I thought.  One inspired the other.
    &quot;Have you read any good books lately?&quot; I asked in an attempt to divert
Doug from Doug.
    &quot;I don't have much time for reading,&quot; he replied casually.
    It's a luxury active people like me can do without, was the implication,
but I assumed it was more likely to be because books dealt with other lives
and Doug was unwilling to expose himself to the trauma of invidious or
humiliating comparisons - either that or he was illiterate.
    &quot;I watch television now and then,&quot; he remarked.
    &quot;I know,&quot; I said, but he didn't react.
    &quot;You like pop music, don't you?&quot; I asked him, still perservering.
    &quot;Yes,&quot; he said with a notice of pride, &quot;anything lively.&quot;
    We stopped by the steps that led to my flat.  A resident, Mr. Townsend,
bald and very old, hobbled by.
    &quot;The old man is almost a cripple,&quot; Doug remarked quietly.
    &quot;It happens if you live long enough,&quot; I said, aware of the incongruity
of Doug referring to his contemporary that way, as if he had forgotten his
own age.
    That's it, I realized suddenly.  Dissolution - that's why he made smoke:
to cover up his fear of death.  He thinks of death in personal terms, someone
he can ward off if he's fit and energetic enough, someone he can grow away
from.  He tries to be a superman or a shadow to bluff death, to pretend
that he lacks death's mortal meal, the substance in between.
    &quot;I must be off,&quot; said Doug dogmatically, &quot;but I'll see you later.&quot;
    &quot;Yes, I'm sure you will,&quot; I told him, and I'll hear you and be obsessed
by you, I thought.
    After dialogue with Doug I was usually mentally and emotionally exhausted
by the fatuousness of it all, by being cast as a prop in one of Doug's
make-believe, torpid productions, but back inside my flat I felt alert and
vigorous; I thought of Doug as a problem to be solved rather than as a pest
who haunted my privacy, who had unwittingly forced me to observe that part
of his personality he wished to hide.  I felt like a missionary or a crusader.
I would try, I decided eventually, to turn Doug inside out.  That, I thought,
should disperse some of the smoke.  Later, the sound of Doug's pop music
wafted upwards and impinged on my eardrums, relating his personality once
more to `his-in-mine'.  Instead of closing the windows and turning on the
fan I banged on the floor with a shoe.  The row, magically it seemed, ceased.
Gleefully I rubbed my hands together and forgot about Doug for the rest
of that day.
    Doug's T.V. tuned in as usual during the evening but I tuned him out
with a few blows from my magic shoe.
    I went to sleep that night with Doug and death on my mind.  I dreamt
I was watching a film.  Doug was the star; the scenes were his visions;
the action his thoughts and the sound his voice.  Then I was in the film
and death was chasing Doug along the sand by the water's edge.  I was death
and Doug was a child who smiled.  I let him go.  We were standing on the
edge of a cliff.  I tried to push Doug over but I lunged right through him
and floated down to the rocks below where he was waiting for me, seated
in the lotus posture, transcendent and transparent, larger than a mountain
... It felt good to wake into a world of illusion once more.
   I was on my way to the letter-boxes to pick up my paper when Doug jogged
past me, his chin jutting, arms acting like pistons, chest heaving and legs
pumping.  He looked an odd figure in his long, baggy shorts which emphasized
his thinness.  He stopped by the letter boxes and extracted his own paper.
   &quot;I had a bad time of it this morning,&quot; he said bravely (or stoically).
&quot;I was attacked by a pack of wild dogs.&quot;  He pointed to his legs.  


</sample>
