<sample>
	<id> L05 </id>
	


	<note> 2008 words </note>
	


	<source> Cassidy </source>
	


	<bl> By Morris West </bl>
	

The return flight to Sydney landed at twenty minutes to six. Arthur Rebus
and I took a cab back to the city.  Rebus wanted half an hour with me at
the hotel before he went home. Ever since we had left the Commissioner's
office, he had been preoccupied and taciturn.  I was bone-tired, so I didn't
mind the silences.  In spite of the abrasions of our day's discussions,
I felt at the end curiously reassured.  As from the following day, I should
be shadowed day and night by guardian angels and stayed up by the presence
of a police expert who would help me to make sense of Cassidy's documents.
I had a pistol licence in my pocket and the name of a reliable gunsmith.
At least I was no longer alone, a floating particle in a hostile atmosphere.   
   Rebus, however, took a different view.  Sitting in my room at the Town
House with a large whiskey clamped in his fist, he told me, moodily: `...I'm
more worried now than I was this morning.  You don't see it, Martin, but
I do.  These are war-games.  You're important because you're sitting on
Cassidy's files; but for the rest, you're an expendable element. The
Commissioner will sacrifice you with as little compunction as he would a
decoy platoon in a field operation ...' 
   `I can't blame him for that, Arthur. He made it very clear.  My options
are still open - most of them, anyway.'
    `No, Martin! Listen to me and try to understand.  This whole melodrama
of rogue unions, rogue cops, rogue politicians, drug runners and their ilk
is about one thing - power!  If a maritime union controls the waterfront,
it controls the trade of the nation.  If a building union can hold up the
construction of silos, the wheat rots and the rats eat it. So deals have
to be made - big deals, legal and illegal: an investigation dropped, a claim
settled, a felon given an early release ... The real problem of drugs is
not the casualties, tragic and all as they are, but the fact that narcotics
have become a world currency, a black-market coinage which will buy anything
anywhere, whose value is increased by shortage, whose movement is impossible
to monitor ... Look at the coastline of this continent.  How the hell do
you patrol it?   Impossible.  You could land a goddamn army anywhere from
Normanton to Derby and the only ones who'd know about it would be the
kangaroos! ... The Commissioner's right.  You're valuable to him because
you can key him in to a new grid in the underground system.  But once he's
in, you're no longer important to him, because you have no political or
executive power.  He won't be indifferent to what happens to you.  He's
too moral a man for that; but he won't give all his blood to keep you alive
- and he won't weep too long at your grave ...'  He sipped meditatively
at his liquor. `I guess what I'm really trying to say is that this, at root,
is a moral matter.  It involves a moral commitment, which I believe the
Commissioner has.  He really hates the corruptors and the intimidators.
Between him and them it's war to the knife.  All through today he was looking
for the same commitment from you.  He didn't get it.  Neither did I, for
that matter. Maybe we're both misreading you, but it seems to me you're
still doing a teeter-totter act on the tightrope.  Which being said, you're
welcome to spit in my eye ...' 
    There was a knock at the door - a bellboy with a large manila envelope.
I borrowed a two-dollar bill from Rebus, to tip him.  The envelope carried
the sender's name: Standish and Waring, Solicitors.  Inside was a letter
and a sheaf of documents. The letter read:
   
     Dear Mr. Gregory, 
     We act for the Macupan Pharmaceutical Company Ltd. of Manila. We
understand that you are the executor of the late Charles Cassidy's will
and that you have taken legal custody of his estate.
     In October last year, Miss Pornsri Rhana, of the Chao Phraya Trading
Company, Bangkok, applied to purchase at par one million five hundred thousand
one dollar shares of Macupan Pharmaceutical, promising to pay upon issue
of the shares.
     A copy of the share application and a photostat of the share certificate
is enclosed.  Also enclosed is our client's agreement to accept payment
in any country of the world, such payment to be made in a mixture of
currencies, a consignment of precious stones of agreed and certified value
and a consignment of pharmaceutical products whose value is similarly
certified. 
     Copies of the certifications are attached.  Miss Rhana informs us the
currency and other items required for the settlement had been held for her
by the late Charles Cassidy and that they would probably now be in your
possession as executor.  We would point out that the payments do not attract
tax or require tax clearance, since they are considerations passing between
two foreign entities, using an Australian entity only as the medium of
exchange.  Neither is there any probate problem, since the items in question
are not part of the estate of the late Charles Cassidy.   
     May we ask you, therefore, to communicate with us as soon as possible,
so that a date and time may be set for the payment of the consideration
and the delivery of the share certificate?
Sincerely yours,

	<misc> Gordon Standish </misc>
	

   I flipped through the documents and handed them without comment to Arthur
Rebus.  He read them slowly, nodding his head like one of those old-fashioned
porcelain Buddhas. Finally, he looked up and said, `Now that's what I call
real style!  No threats.  A nice, courtly letter from one legal colleague
to another! I wonder what the Commissioner will make of this one.'
   `Standish and Waring ... The Premier recommended I use them for Cassidy's
probate.'
    `You could have done a lot worse.  They're old line, stuffy, desperately
slow - and completely reliable.'
    `So why would Erhardt Moller use them as his collectors?'
    `Precisely for that reason. Given these documents, they wouldn't think
of questioning the instructions of their client.  If the client tells them
that a kilo of heroin is a pharmaceutical product or a new line of baking
powder, they'll accept it as fact.  Why should they do otherwise?  They'll
expect a similarly courteous and uncomplicated response from you.  If they
get it, the matter's closed.  But I'd like to hear first from Miss Pornsri
Rhana.  Either she's been set up, or she's setting you up for Mr. Erhardt
Moller, or this is standard pattern for transactions between Cassidy
and the boys in Manila.'
    `I'd like to hear what the Commissioner advises.'
     `Why don't you leave the lady and the Commissioner to me? I have your
power of attorney. No sense to keep a dog and bark yourself. I'll drop in
to see the lady on my way home and phone the Commissioner tonight.  In the
morning, I'll call Standish and Waring and let them know I'll be handling
the matter under your power of attorney.  We'll meet at the bank in the
morning.'
    I was glad when he left.  He could be a diverting character, but he
had all sorts of unexpected edges to bruise one's self-esteem.  I needed
some balm for my wounded feelings. So, good and faithful husband, I telephoned
my wife in Klosters. 
    It was Clare who answered the phone.  She told me Pat and the children
were already out on the slopes. Pat had found this marvellous ski instructor
who was bringing them along at an enormous rate.
    `... They're having a wonderful time, Martin. It would do your heart
good to see them.'
    `I'm delighted.  And what about you, Clare?  How's the big romance?'
    `Coming along very nicely.  He's kind and considerate. Terribly
absentminded, but I can cope with that.  He's working on his book.  I'm
working on him.  It's a very comfortable situation.  How are you holding
up, Martin?'
    `I'm holding up.  Your old man left a tidy estate to the family - and
a bloody minefield for me.  I'm picking my way through the middle of it
now.'
    `Pat told me about the Thai mistress and the daughter she bore to Charlie.'
    `That's only the half of it.  I've spent today in Canberra with the
Federal Police.  I have to go up to Bangkok in three days' time.  Also,
for security reasons, I'm changing hotels.  I'm moving tonight to the Melmar
Marquis.  Write it down - the Melmar Marquis.  In Bangkok, I'll be at the
Oriental.'                            
    `I know, dear.'
    `How do you know?'
    `Mr. Melville called last night to say he'd be meeting you there.  He
kindly offered to carry any letters or messages.  Would you like me to have
Pat call you when she gets back?'
    `What time will that be?'
    `It's normally quite late - three, four in the afternoon.  They're doing
the long runs now, stopping at the halfway hut for lunch, then skiing the
last leg to be home before dark.  But I guess that'll be the wee, small
hours for you.'
    `It will indeed.  Just give her my love and kiss the kids for me.  I'll
call as soon as I'm installed in the Melmar.  Lots of love, Clare.  And
good luck with your scholar.  By the way, what's his name?'
     `Leonidas Farkis ... and if you say it's a funny name, I'll kill you!
 He's a Greek-American, a great scholar who ...'
     `Hey, hey, hey, relax, Clare!  This is son-in-law Martin, remember?
I'm on your side.  Always have been.'
     `I know!'  She gave a little, unsteady laugh.  `It's just that I'm
very, very fond of him and Pat and the children don't always understand
his funny ways ... I'm sorry you're having such a bad time with Charles'
affairs.  Do be careful.  He could be such a monster; he probably left booby
traps everywhere.  Try to come home soon.  The children miss you terribly
and Pat gets very restless without you ... Goodbye, my dear!'
      When I put down the receiver I felt a sudden pang of jealousy and
resentment.  Pat was restless! Pat had found a new ski instructor who kept
her out on the slopes until dark.  Splendid!  This is the day the Lord hath
made, Alleluia!  Meantime, dutiful husband, I, Martin Gregory the Righteous,
had just been licensed to carry a firearm, warned that he was an expendable
element in a war-game and that people didn't trust him because he had lust
and greed written all over his face!
      I called the Melmar Marquis and asked to speak to Laura Larsen.  This
time they found her within thirty seconds.  I told her that if she still
had room I'd love to come and stay at her place.
      She said, `Good! I think it's wise ... and I'll be glad to have you
near anyway.  When you arrive, ask for Peters at reception.  He'll take
you up to the suite, register you there and explain the house procedures
to maintain your privacy and at the same time keep your communications open.
I won't see you tonight, because I'm hostess to a group of travel agents
who are very important to us.  But I'll come and have breakfast with you
at eight in the morning.  How was Canberra?'     
      `Busy.'
      `And your new probate lawyers?'
      `I'm impressed.  They're very efficient.  I'll tell you about them
when I see you.  Ciao.'
      That made me feel a little better and if it added a line or two
of lechery to my public face, then too bad. I shaved, showered, put on fresh
linen and a fresh summer suit and poured myself a drink to farewell the
Town House.  I was just beginning to enjoy it when the telehone rang.  Mr.
Erhardt Moller was on the line from Manila. 
      `Good evening, Mr Gregory.  You should by now have received a set
of documents from our solicitors, Standish and Waring.'    


</sample>
