<sample>
	<id> L12 </id>
	


	<note> 2001 words </note>
	


	<source> Unsettled Areas </source>
	


	<h> The golden triangle </h>
	


	<bl> By Andrew Taylor </bl>
	

  Phyllergry Maurice had eaten a hard-boiled egg for breakfast and spent the
rest of the day carrying a particularly unpleasant umbrella around Rome.
The egg was a farewell present from his former hostess in Zurich, to whom
he had said goodbye the morning before. She was convinced there was nothing
to be eaten south of the Alps, and had provided him with two hard-boiled
eggs, two ham sandwiches, two carrots, two packets of fruit juice, but only
one slice of cake and only one packet of salt. These latter puzzled Phyllergry.
Was he meant to have one meal with cake and the other with salt? Or was
he meant to be accompanied on his mission by someone else - someone who
ate cake while he ate salt, or vice versa?
  The umbrella had been pressed upon him by his wife as she said goodbye
to him at Melbourne Airport. She had been given it by her mother, who had
picked it up - as the saying goes - somewhere in the East: Bangkok, Singapore,
Vientiane. Descending to him by the female line like hereditary syphilis.
  `It's sure to be raining in Europe,' his wife had whispered in his ear,
pretending to kiss him. And while biting the lobe of his left ear so hard
that both his heels left the air terminal's Pirelli rubber flooring
simultaneously, she closed his fingers over the umbrella. By the time he'd
come back to earth, she had vanished.
  As luck would have it, it actually was raining when he arrived at Roma
Termini and it continued all next day. Phyllergry's umbrella was a loud
but uninvigorating red, with a pattern of purple and green dragons rampaging
around it, snapping at each other's tails and at anyone who happened to be
near. Phyllergry himself, after a day of it, was deafened by the oriental
riot he'd been carrying around Rome, and was looking for a rubbish bin to
shove it into.
  He wasn't looking too carefully because he was prey to several worries.
First, Shielby Wright hadn't made contact. Ever since eating the hard-boiled
egg Phyllergry'd been on his feet, from Campo de' Fiori to the Campidoglio,
up Via del Corso to Piazza Colonna, from which he'd cut across to the top
of Via Veneto by way of the Pincio and a suspiciously long loiter in the
park of the Villa Borghese before embarking on a leisurely zigzag with
the crowd all the way south from Via della Croce to Via Frattina, showing
a particularly protracted interest in Gucci shirts and Pollini footware
around Via Condotti and Via Borgognona, with even a step or two into Bocca
di Leone. Not a bite. His umbrella should have attracted the whole of the
Italian Air Force, probably had, but nothing from Shielby.
  And that was his second worry. Did all this inattention mean that his
wife, despite or maybe because of all his precautions, wasn't in on it after
all? Did her pressing the umbrella into his hands, just two metres and seven
seconds from the Overseas Passengers Only door at Melbourne Airport mean
simply that she was worried about him getting wet? Or was there still, as
he'd begun in the last seven or eight months to suspect, even hope, a leak
in his security, a leak towards her, so that she too was protecting him,
and the rotten weather and the unsightly umbrella were the first two parts
of a triangle, the third part of which ought to have been contact with Shielby?
But he'd tramped the lengths and depths of Rome in rain and Shielby hadn't
made contact.
  It was dark, and it had stopped raining. Walking down Via Veneto with
that umbrella up was as conspicious as riding down it naked on a giraffe.
Phyllergry crept into a side street, folded it as inconspicuously as he
could (it was one of those handbag umbrellas where the spokes folded in
two, so that the whole affair had to be brandished aloft to get it to collapse
at all) and pushed it into the brass letterbox of the Hotel Adriatico. Breathing
deep gulps of relief he strode back toward Via Veneto where a woman he'd
never seen before looked at him from a table where she was sitting alone.
  `So you've made it at last,' she murmured sideways, as he sat down. `The
umbrella, was it a disguise?'
  He spent the evening and some of the next morning trying to piece her
into the situation. Over dinner it seemed particularly sinister that his
Calamari Fritti had fishbones in it and this bad omen cast a shadow on all
that followed. No matter how he juggled the pieces, something was always
not quite in place.
  She had been born in the carpark of a Macdonald's takeaway in Westchester
County, N.Y., one particularly nasty February night in 1956 after a lorry
loaded with early models of transistor radios had skidded on the ice and
wiped out three traffic signals and a couple of important powerlines, tying
up traffic all round the district and beyond for seven hours. Her mother,
who was always hopeless at getting anywhere on time, hadn't got through
even half her Royal Chesseburger before Candice, always on time if not ahead
of it, arrived. From the moment of her birth she's had an aversion to fast
food, as she revealed to Phyllergry on finishing an entree of mussels and
waiting for her Saltimbocca alla Romana with accompanying insalata mista.
Nonetheless, she had undergone the usual grisly American education until,
on graduating from college, she was awarded a scholarship to study umbrella
design and marketing at Mme. Lisenka Misticek's Academy, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Arriving in Sofia with a pocketbook full of healthy American dollars, a
phone number and no knowledge of the language whatever, it had taken her
several months to discover that Mme. Misticek's Academy had passed from
this earth in 1934. Having gone, finally, to the police for help, it was
soon discovered that she had culpably overstayed her ten-day visa and only
the last of the American dollars and a mythical virginity saved her from
probably permanent residency in the Sofia lockup. She escaped to Dublin
disguised as the non-speaking part of a package tour, and worked for three
years at the famous Watershed, designing Wellingtons and sou'westers and
trying to perfect the mechanism which would enable an umbrella to go both
up and down automatically.
  Her design was based on a gas pressure principle not unlike that employed
in recoilless automatic rifles. Under normal operating conditions an umbrella
is subject to battering by high velocity winds which not infrequently turn
it inside out - you may have seen one which has suffered this unfortunate
fate, discarded in the street and looking like a vampire who has failed
to make it home to the tomb before daybreak. Candice's idea was to use the
canopy of the umbrella to harness this windpower in somewhat the way that
a windmill does; though instead of it revolving, an intricate array of springs
and rods was activated by its flapping and buffeting so as to compress air
in a cylinder concealed in the handle. When a button on the handle was pressed,
the air which had thus been gradually compressed in this cylinder would
drive a tiny piston within the shaft and draw the umbrella closed, even
if the handle were pointing up and the point down.
  Unfortunately the Irish police stepped in when she filed the plans at
the Patents Office. Not only was such an umbrella the ideal tool for
shoplifters, who could sweep whole trayloads of unpaid-for goods into the
open umbrella and then, at the touch of a button, furl it all up; but also
the principle was capable of transforming Ireland's most essential and hence
most common personal accompaniment into a dangerous clandestine weapon ideal
for terrorists across the border. Heartbroken, Candice tried to explain
that as she had developed it so far the umbrella wouldn't furl, but simply
close. No use arguing. She left Watershed under a cloud and returned to
Westchester, N.Y. Now she was working as deputy manager of a sporting goods
store with an interesting line in whips, cattle goads and handcuffs, as
well as the usual water proof paraphernalia.
  And there she probably would have stayed, instead of prowling aimlessly
around Phyllergry's hotel room in the morning wishing there were some way
she could make coffee. But two weeks ago an Irishman called Kaye or O'Kaye
came into the shop, looking for an umbrella to give his wife.
  `Somethin' broight!' he'd said, in an unconvincing accent. `Say now,
would you be havin' somethin' oriental?' Well, she'd had a tray of particularly
sharp backscratchers from Bangkok, but nothing in an oriental line of
umbrellas. Kaye, or it might have been O'Kaye, talked then at length about
the umbrellas of Cherbourg, a city he had obviously never visited.
  `It means dear, or rich, city, ye know. In Europe. What city in the orient
today, considerin' inflation and the cost of labour, could afford to build
the Coliseum, let alone run its show?' As he left her shop, after buying
a pair of green hip boots and a roll of barbed wire, he handed her his card.
It read Shielby Kaye, or it might have been O'Kaye, 56 The Lower End, somewhere
in Ireland. She had been using the card as a bookmark in her copy of The
Winds of War so as to have it constantly handy when she lost it, and the
book, to a quick-fingered Canadian at Heathrow two days before.
  It may have been because he was having a shower during the last part of
her story that Phyllergry found it hard to piece it all together. But no
matter how he looked at it, it still didn't work: Wright didn't come into
it. Though so many other things did. The shoplifting, for instance, was
merely a front for something more deadly: a terrorist's dream, an umbrella
with a cylinder of compressed air concealed in the handle, simply waiting
for the touch of a button to transform it into a deadly weapon. And the
hip boots, he realised, looking miserably at the pair of light shoes he'd
ruined by tramping through every puddle in Rome the day before. As for the
barbed wire - and suddenly his heart somersaulted! Barbed wire, for tying
up hostages!
  `Excuse me,' he mumbled, `I have to call my wife in Australia.' His
two-year-old daughter answered.
  `Hello Daddy,' she said.
  `Is Mummy there?' he bawled into the phone again and again, and she'd
reply `Hello Daddy,' or `Daddy,' or simply nothing at all. He was about
to hang up in despair when his daughter, for a change, said `Hello Mummy.'
  `Oh, it's you is it?' his wife's voice came via satellite. `I thought
it was that beastly Irishman again.'
  `That beastly Irishman again', via satellite, came the echo. She sounded
like a poorly rehearsed two-part choir.
  `Shielby Wright?' he shouted into the mouthpiece.
  `Well, we're missing you, but we're managing okay. Do take care of yourself.
I'd hate to think what this phone call's costing you. Darling, do take care,'
she said and hung up.
  `Darling, do take care,' came the little electronic echo and he was hung
up too.
  He found Candice in the hotel restaurant sipping a thoughtful grapefruit
juice. She had ordered blackcurrant yoghurt, smoked salmon with whipped
sour cream and capers, croissants and caffelatte for breakfast. Still
trembling, he absently asked for a cappucino and wished that he smoked so
that he could start breaking matches into little bits and making a mess
all around him. If there was a mess all around him, at present he was the
person who didn't know just what it was. Which meant that right now the
mess was all inside him too, like a traveller's gastric ailment, biding
its time, just waiting to get out.


</sample>
