Gardens of delight By Vivienne Causby  

I am the child who lived next door and saw. I did not understand. Grandma
insisted that I did not understand. `She is far too young and innocent.
No doubt we shelter her too much, but she is precious to us, especially
now. So fortunate she does not realise the truth. It would be too dreadful'.
  I understood. I knew where power lay. I had been aware of the garden next
door for several months, even before I encountered the stray cat or discovered
how interesting and useful the front street could be.
  Our own garden was large and full of interest. Grandma had bought the
house intending to take in what she called `paying guests', Grandpa being
an indolent man. Then Father did something clever with a twist of copper
pipe and created a remarkable lawn sprinkler as well as a new method of
irrigating farm land - I have a retentive memory even for that which I do
not understand - and suddenly we were rich and Father much esteemed in his
field.
  Our garden, always a pleasant wilderness, became as green as a rain forest
because of the new sprinklers. However I quickly discovered they were not
perfect. A few grains of sand down the pipe and the water sprayed erratically
which made it more interesting. Three pieces of fine gravel and the sprinklers
tended to disintegrate violently.
  I kept this knowledge to myself as I did not wish to injure Father's
feelings. He was so proud of having provided handsomely for us all.
  We had no difficulty in occupying the many rooms even though there were
only five of us, Grandma, Grandpa, my parents and me. We enjoyed having
adequate space for private study, for books and curios and somewhere secluded
for the billiard table and harps.
  If our house was spacious, the place next door was immense.
  `I wonder how many rooms,' said Mother. She never did know. I do now,
but I keep forgetting.
  Grandma said the garden next door was a jungle. `I like a controlled
wilderness'. She really did try to control everything.
  Mother said the house must be deserted. Grandma insisted she had seen
movements through the front gates. Vague movements.
  It was at about this time we had particularly heavy rains and a portion
of the limestone wall separating the two gardens subsided into a heap of
sodden limestone rubble and sand.
  Grandma spoke of consulting our neighbour, if we actually had one, about
repairs. Uncharacteristically she kept putting it off.
  Morning glory grew over the wall and I was forbidden to walk through the
invitingly hidden gap in the wall.   
  `Heaven only knows what might be lurking there'. Mother's voice dropped
dramatically. `Or who. Some dreadful old man'.
  I walked through the gap in the wall and saw the statue. I saw the woman,
albeit from a distance and I knew. I have this ability still of sometimes
seeing and knowing what has gone before. Sometimes I make bold, inventive
guesses. This is often more successful than sensing the truth.
  However, when I saw the woman I was certain that there had been much done
in that house that was amiss. I smiled at the thought of Mother's warning.
What need to fear old men!
  I did not mention the woman to anyone at home or my excursions beyond
our boundaries. I am sure neither the statue nor the woman knew of my
venturings either.
  Next day, while pursuing the stray cat, I decided to fully test my ability
to elude Mother's vigilant eye. I followed the animal through our front
gate and discovered the street, Cremorne Terrace. We live in a nice part
of the city.
  The magnitude of the outside world surprised me. I was so impressed by
the distance I had to walk before reaching the gates of the house next door
that I quite forgot the cat.         
  But cats are merely cats and these gates were taller than any gate I could
have imagined. They consisted of ornate interlocking scrolls of iron, sadly
rusted, and were firmly secured by heavy iron chains.
  Beyond the gates I could see the overgrown garden densely green and waiting,
looking more dangerous than when seen from the gap in the wall. 
  I stood to one side of the gates. Within nothing moved. The wind stirred
my curls, but did not trouble the foliage within the gates. I waited too.
  Presently a large girl came stumping along carrying a school satchel. A
sturdy girl with abundant mud-coloured hair. I took a step towards the high
gates and peered intently through them. The girl stopped and asked, `What
d'you think you're gawking at?'
  `Something moved. I think it was a cat.'
  She threw down her satchel. `Dopey kid, why don't you go home?' she replied
as she squinted through the gate.
  `My friend who lives there does not have a cat.'
  She replied by poking out her tongue. I quietly threw sand on her satchel.
`Some people say the house is haunted.'
  `How would you like a smack under the ear?' Then she stiffened and I know
the statue had allowed itself to be seen. `Who does live there?' 
  `My friend,' I said. `Did he wave?'
  She ignored me and began clambering up the gate. With a shameful display
of soiled knickers she flung a leg over the gate and slithered down the
other side.
  `You watch my bag or I'll thump you,' she directed and, turning, ran deep
into the garden.
  I carefully thrust small stones into her satchel. Then I went to the small
side gate and with considerable difficulty managed to open it wide. Then
I stood beside the satchel as though guarding it.
  I enjoyed every silent moment for I knew that Mother must have already
discovered my absence. Several moments later I heard a sound which I knew
was not Mother.
  It was a muffled cry followed by a great threshing about and in another
instant the girl came racing, tumbling and tripping, as she fled the garden.
Through the small gate she ran, her mouth agape and her eyes wide.
  She did not pause to thank me for opening the gate, but ran straight across
the footpath and onto the road.
  As I learned later, parkland-bounded Cremorne Terrace usually carries
very little traffic, but on that day at that precise moment the girl managed
to run directly into the path of a speeding car. 
  In almost the same instant I found myself seized by gentle hands. Mother
had found me.
  `She might have been killed.' Mother sobbed as Grandma calmed her with
brandy and water while Father fed me warm milk. `That poor girl. It was
awful.'
  The sturdy girl was of course dead. It must have been fate. I do not know
what became of her satchel.
  For some time I had extreme difficulty escaping the watchful eyes of my
loved ones. I occupied a part of my time in starting a splended collection
of pebbles and Father bought me a white rabbit which appeared to be retarded.
  Alone in my upstairs bedroom I often stood on the window sill but to no
avail. All I could see of the next garden was the tops of trees. One might
have concluded there was no house at all next door, not even the tower was
visible.
  At last Mother's extreme vigilance abated and I was able to slip through
the gap in the wall.
  The statue stood in its accustomed place, its arm upraised triumphantly.
Or was it merely indicating invitation?
  I said, `I sent you the girl. Now I will speak to the woman.'
  The statue remained unmoving. There was no sound but the sighing of wind
beyond the garden wall. I took a small stone and threw it gently at the
statue's left foot.
  I said, `I could have used a large rock.' Then I turned and walked towards
the hidden house.
  I am not large now. In those distant days I was tiny. I could hide myself
in the smallest space. And I am a very still person when I choose.
  Now I walked quietly, tidily, so as not to disturb too many leaves - I
prefer not to make enemies. I walked until I reached the edge of the shrubbery.
I stood at the edge of a vast ragged patch of grass. Once it had been a
lawn, but now it was sadly neglected. Sadly.
  My eyesight is still exceptional and I could see right to the other side
of the grass and beyond to a ruined conservatory, but I had never walked
past the spot where I now stood.
  I knew the woman would be there among the strange rank creepers with their
fleshy reaching leaves. I walked across the rough grass and stood in the
shelter of lofty dying dahlias. I could not be seen, yet I saw the woman.
  She was about my mother's age, but a world apart in evey other way. Now
she sat on a stone bench as she chatted to the statue which had apparently
strolled across to her.
  `I shall have the conservatory reglazed.' The statue smiled and I sensed
she said this often. She said, `Now that I have control I can attend to
many matters too long neglected.'
  The statue had become a boy some years older than me. He carried himself
with style and poise. He smiled yet even so I sensed a deep terror within
him. He said `You should remember that our elder sister thought she saw
me within the conservatory. That is why she smashed the glass; why you have
control. Has she really gone?'
  She said, `Go back.' And he was gone. Back to being a statue.
  I stepped from the shelter of the dahlias. `Why did you send him away?'
  She raised her lorgnette to study me. `There are matters I do not care
to discuss before Darian,' she said calmly. `He might become upset.'
  I sensed a calm watchfulness in her. `He might learn the truth.'
  She smiled. `So tiny and yet so knowing. Did I think of you?'
  I looked into her opaque eyes and knew it was time to guess. I said, `Saw
it all. I saw you thrust him through the window.' We both looked up to the
tower, slated and gothic. I said, `Why?'
  `He took the diamonds from my sister's room and hid them.'
  I could understand both their actions, but - `What are diamonds?'
  `Stones.'
  `Like pebbles?' I had sensed we had much in common.
  She laughed. A cool sound. `Pebbles which sparkle and are of great worth.'
  I gazed up in my innocent incomprehension.
  She explained. `Stones which glitter more briliantly than any crystal.
They are enduring and worth a fortune.'
  So there was a mysterious power in stones. As usual, my instinct had been
correct. `Where did the boy, Darian, hide them?'
  She shook her head. `He would never tell me. Now he has forgotten, I think.'
She frowned at me, suddenly uneasy. `Am I able to make you disappear as
I can Darian?'
  I nodded, hiding my new-found strength. `What plants are they?' I pointed
to the rampant creepers and as she turned to look at them I slipped away.
Let her think what she would.
  I walked around the edge of the rough grass, hiding from sight until I
reached the statue. On the pedestal was carved an inscription already flaking
away. I feared it would be gone before I learned to read.
  This time I did not toss a pebble. Instead I quickly plucked the tips
of nearby plants and flowers and placed them beside the statue's feet. They
were mostly weeds, but this merely emphasized my childish ignorance.
  `I shall be back,' I assured the statue prettily.
  I climbed through the gap in the wall, picked some morning glory flowers
and selected a few of the minutest pebbles.

