<subsample>
	<id> M01a </id>
	


	<source> Omega Science Digest - March 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Warhead </h>
	


	<bl> by Josie Flett </bl>
	

UP on a mountain slope so steep not even the timber-getters can plunder
its extremities lives a wildman they call Goddam Billy.  The place:
east-coast Border Ranges, New South Wales.  The man: William Carter Godman,
born 1896, into a family of tough country reprobates.
  On a clear day, about 10 years ago, there was an explosion and the old
respectable Godman homestead burned to the ground.  Billy watched from the
lantana thicket, then promptly built himself a shelter from scraps of
exasperation and toolshed.  Today Goddam Billy owns a fibro shack, 25 chaff
bags and an expanding flea plague.
  This many years later he lopes up and down, hacking pathways into his
own remnant rainforest with an itinerant brush hook.  He lusts for an
occasional imaginary woman, a grinning, painted-up broad, and smells like
the stiff, rancid cheese he gnaws with indecent gums after the canned soup
and breadcrusts run out.
  The only time Goddam Billy ever ventures into the other reality is on
collection day.  He writes to his middleaged daughter in Brisbane each
month, entrusting his postage a surly woman who makes the daily
milk run and favours Billy with unceasing service out of pity for his
selfinduced plight.
  Beryl from Brisbane comes every three months to the foot of the mountainside,
bringing the usual provisions along with articles requested by letter when
she can decipher his handwriting.  Sometimes he curses and wants to know
where the axe handle is?
  So she eases her tired, 55-year-old overweight into the car and drives
back along the dirt road, 21 kilometres to the township's general store
where they're certain to have such a vital tool of trade.
  &quot;Goddam him,&quot; she moans.  &quot;Why can't he live in an accessible place like
everybody else!&quot;
  She underestimates the old bastard's cunning.
  Billy waits, perched atop a four-gallon drum of perishables, for her return.
He has clear blue eyes and a sense of humour, but like some neglected old
men, is a groteque sight to behold.  He washes around the edges sometimes,
but doesn't bother about changing into something fresh.
  Consequently, his shirt and singlet and musty blue serge trousers have
acquired a dull grey tinge overall.  He goes sockless all year through;
thrusts his feet into lace-up boots which are solid but currently without
laces.  Beryl offered to bring laces, however he stated clearly his intention
of remaining laceless and so struts about grandly with exposed eyelet holes.
Elsewhere, yet only by sheer good luck, his buttons are intact.
  After a long, dutiful chat, Beryl goes off leaving Billy to fend for himself.
During the next three days the old hermit can be seen from a distance lugging
endless bagfuls of foodstuff up the steep slope.  Once the task is complete,
he sifts through the welcome gifts seeking newspaper wrappings from the
butcher's shop.  Excited, he scutters about the woodpile and with his limited
leg aims a good kick at the whining, starving cat before setting himself
down on the chopping block.  Whereupon he pushes his eyes down the rows
of type, greedy for something to spark up a timeworn fancy.
  He pauses in between sentences to savour his own situation.  The beat
of distant drums cannot disturb his peace of mind.  Nor can a writer's clever
words intimidate his better chance of survival.  In this, his private
wonderland of natural phenomena, he relies on the silence to hold his future
secure.
  Goddam Billy reflects in between sentences.  Spiritualism doesn't account
for anything.  He knows there is still that inevitable, eventual joining
with the Universal Mind once your time runs out, and here and now, well,
there's Karma, that balancing out of good and evil forces to answer to.
  So he plays the game.  Shot a dog or two which infringed on his goodwill
to wildlife and called that a truce.  Watches the noxious weed inspectors
watching out for marijuana farmers in the foothills below and wonders why
the treatment of paid spies should be less than for dogs.  He refrains because
they have stayed away from his threshold and that's the way he wants it
to be.
  Now he longs for the wet season - ah, that's the time for contemplation!
When those moist, cyclonic winds rush in from the sea causing forest giants
to quiver and shed weakened limbs, Goddam Billy huddles in front of his
logfire, remembering what's been before, speculating on what's still to
come.  Last rainy season, while curled up like a cat on his pile of hessian
potato bags, he had a dream.
  Goddam Billy dreamed of a new era for mankind.  Sitting comfortably inside
his own head, he leaned back to admire the decor.  A pleasant place wherein
happy colour schemes and improvised lighting sources fused ingeniously to
seduce the unwary, to beckon the suspicious.  And within this inviting
sensorium the music of nature's orchestral harmonies created lilting, lovely
sounds for mindwaves to dance to.
  In fact, the whole venue pulsated - a haven for mind neurons in their
natural state.  Given fresh impetus by frequent, new sensual delights, they
reached out in scansorial expectation ... for eternity.
  Then unexpectedly within this paradise of mind, the music forms faltered
and paradise turned to hell - a seething friction of ferocity, a flashing,
spinning confusion of torments.  Desperate for purity of existence, Billy's
mindcells fought against invading negative energies until, within the vortex
of his wracked mind, a single realisation took hold.  It fell away once,
reasserted itself with renewed vigour.
  Reject the message!  Destroy the message!  But because the thought patterns
of an innocent are both patriotic and generous, these neural pirates gained
control.  They fled the sensory host-ship leaving their message behind.
Embedded deep within the man's consciousness it festered, and the man soon
came to understand that the threat and the lust for revenge were not of
his own imagining.
  Some future time there would come an end to free reasoning.  Like the
rest of his kind, the dispensibles, Billy's mindcells would be broken, smashed
into uncountable scores of smithereens by this rebuffed alien force.
  WARHEAD!  The invasion of mankind's proud spirit, his psyche - perhaps
his soul - by some self-appointed universal overlord!  At least, that's
how Goddam Billy chose to explain away his dream.

ONE morning Goddam Billy arose as usual.  Lit his fire, performed his morning
tea and toast ritual.  Afterwards, chose to wander downtrack for a while,
thinking all the while.  Something was nagging his conscience.  He felt
the presence of a messenger beyond his own comprehension, yet within his
own spirit-sphere.  He grew excited, agitated if he tried to cast his thoughts
aside, but calm, in control - yes, almost powerful - when he relaxed into
that gentle, meditative quiet he loved and knew so well.
  And soon the message flowed through into Goddam Billy's waiting conscious,
a sharp reminder of his first encounter with Warhead hostility.  No time
for speculation!  He recognised with terror that mankind's fate would be
sealed by his own actions or lack of them.  He should tell the people of
their peril!
  Yet hadn't he retired from their collective company out of disgust?  Hadn't
he always deplored their frivolous games of social roulette?  He scorned
their destructive non-allegiance to nature, despised their supreme ugliness
of mind.
  Hesitation overruled.  He would make contact with their elected
representative.  He must, after all, convince them of their danger.
  So Goddam Billy ploughed his way down the track, old topcoat flapping
about his legs, eyes bright with the urgency of his mission.  He was panting,
dangerously close to exhaustion by the time he made the gravel roadway where
Beryl came for her daughterly chats.
  Beryl's bulk flickered across his inner visual screen for an instant,
but no more.  She was engulfed, in her handknitted suit, by the rush of
his urgency.  For half a kilometre he ran, stumbling every now and then
on an uneven patch of road surface, pausing occasionally to allow his body's
whispering breath to subside within its tortured physical framework.
  A car went by spitting out tiny bits of gravel.  But didn't stop to enquire.
He hardly noticed, although it occurred to him (too late) that a ride to
his destination might have been more expedience than luxury.  Intent on
his mission, he plummetted down, down, down, into unconsciousness.

NURSE Nixon went off duty at 2 am without so much as a goodbye from the
oncoming shift.  Still, you can't expect much in the way of goodwill from
those jealous of your own youthful predicament, she confided to herself,
quite reasonably.  Sister Watson and the dowdy old cosmopolitan, Janette
Winkovich.  The one all fire and bitch, the other war-ravaged and oldfashioned
- yes, antiquated to the point of no return!
  Nurse Nixon giggled to herself as she walked between the flower gardens
to her car.  Apart from a dutiful obedience learned in her student years
and a muted respect for her parents she didn't take much notice of her aged
superiors.  With no shame and very little misadventure she was &quot;into&quot; sex,
dope, rock and roll.  Everything inspiring was New Wave these days.
  Yet little Nurse Nixon had room left in her heart for one tired old man.
  &quot;There's a new patient in Number Six,&quot; she told her doctor friend, Mike
Wilson, at ten o'clock breakfast.  &quot;Who is absolutely fascinating if you
have the time to listen.  He has the zaniest ideas about our future as Russian
slaves.  Says we'll all be taken over by their underhand methods.  Mental
warfare is imminent - at least, that's what he says.&quot;
  &quot;Sounds like the old codger is suffering from a touch of futurophobia.
I expect they'll just send him home,&quot; remarked the indifferent doctor from
the depths of his breakfast bowl.  True to her conditioning, Nurse Nixon
said no more.                           

  A leap across the time-space.  The year 1998.  Human mindwaves have been
measured, registered, voluntarily levelled - but never controlled.  Ever
since the introduction of biofeedback therapy there has been a move towards
whole spectrum observation of the human imagination.
  Weekly readings of the individual's electro-magnetic emissions allow true
judgement of his creative instincts.  The artist engineer and manual worker
can now be paid according to his talents.  Clinics were set up in the early
'90s to revive (restimulate) or to recapture wandering mindwaves via the
various (Tune-in and Tune-up!) attachment techniques.  Revival kits have
become if not a way of life then a fact of life.  Science has made available
the instrumentation to measure transference of mindpower from one human
source to another.
  The year 1998 has affirmed the beginning of the end - the Warhead Phenomenon.
Just when they had AIDS licked and the spirit of international cooperation
was being feted worldwide, Russia's Collective Intelligence Seekers were
detected as isolated infestations within the world's populations.  The
Americans quickly developed their own Law Enforcement Neurons to quell the
effects of Russia's intermind sabotage army; whereby &quot;Operation Psychowarp&quot;
developed into a fullscale brainwash with sacrifices offered up on both
sides.
  There will come an end to free reasoning, since America's ever-gullible
neuron force has little hope against such devious enemy obsessions.  Goddam
Billy's mindwaves, fraught with amassed energies in conflict, exploded into
a deathly silence one day and his life's breath retreated to the beyond.
The mind vampires gorged themselves with empty offerings - the mental images
of a hermit versed in pure thought.
  Goddam Billy died as he had lived - alone.  He suffered no fate worse
than death, unless it was realisation in life.  Despite his request that
the Godman estate be made part of the adjoining National Park, Beryl sold
his entire virgin rainforest to the local timber millers.  Which is just
what Billy would have expected.
  Two weeks after that Beryl, too, became a slave to Russia and lost
everything, including her mind.  Nuclear technology was all in vain.
 

</subsample>
