<sample>
	<id> M04 </id>
	


	<note> 2018 words </note>
	


	<source> Omega Science Digest </source>
	


	<h> The bullet that grows in the gun </h>
	


	<bl> By Terry Dowling </bl>
	

THE six words were all it took.
  &quot;Tell us about the Green Man.&quot;
  And the five other people in Gustav Bremmer's eccentric wood-panelled office
tensed, leant forward in their chairs.  The polite small talk was gone,
as was the illusion of easy company.
  &quot;Not yet, Professor Bremmer, please!&quot;  Fair-minded, level-headed Harry Gellis
made his usual plea for justice.  &quot;Mr and Mrs Tate have questions of their
own first.  They know nothing about the reason behind tonight's meeting.
I didn't tell them.&quot;
  Bremmer conceded the point, settled back in his chair and regarded his
guests. 
  &quot;Very well, Harry.  But I would have thought that we could hear the Tates'
account of this fabulous Green Man and not keep them.&quot;
  &quot;But I brought them along to illustrate Markham's point, Professor, not
just to talk about their own experience. I want them to be here for the
opening of the box.  If you don't mind.&quot;
  Gustav Bremmer leant over to the gas ring near the floor and turned up
the flame under the kettle, began to make the tea according to his ritual.
Outside the leadlight casements, down in the quadrangle, night was falling.
The small diamond panes were filling with an ever-deepening blue.  An autumn
chill was in the air, and the gas ring warmed the room pleasantly.
  &quot;Ah, the grand opening of the box!  No, I don't mind.  But hardly impartial
observers, Harry.&quot;
  Harry pressed on.  &quot;Which is why Sally Radbrook and Charles Ross are here.
They have no vested interests either way.&quot;  He turned to the two students,
gave each a smile of encouragement and silent gratitude.  &quot;All we need is
Doctor Markham and we can begin.&quot;
  Bremmer laughed indulgently and filled the cups.  For the moment Harry
thought he looked the kindly old gentleman, not the ruthless head of department
who, through the years, ultimately had ruined the careers of Markham and
possibly many others.  Bremmer's ruthlessness was well-known among his present
staff - not just rumour, not just exaggeration.
  &quot;Good old Benjamin*Benajmin.  Will he make it? with `Form Follows Function' 
and all.  Oh my!  Can I stand it?&quot;
  &quot;That's unfair, Professor,&quot;  Harry said.  &quot;Doctor Markham was a devoted
member of staff.  He never falsified data and he believes in what we're
doing.  Meeting the Tates will be important for him.&quot;
  &quot;Yes, yes.  Spare me, Harry.  But I'd rather have a whisperer like you
than a shouter like him any day.  Attend closely, Miss Radbrook, Mr Ross!
Tonight we see the folly of 15 years laid to rest - the opening of the box!
The famous Bremmer-Markham-Gellis box!  Then we shall hear about the Green
Man.&quot;
  The undergrads exchanged glances.  The Tates, a neat well-dressed couple
in their early forties, did too.  Harry suspected the Tates were feeling
foolish, totally out of their depth.  Mrs Tate reached for the walking stick
beside her, gripped the curved handle.
  When all of them had steaming cups from the famous Bremmer gas ring, Harry
made several polite attempts to chair proceedings, then gave up and sipped
his tea.  His watch said 6.25.  Ben Markham*Marham would be here soon.
Then Harry would have to keep control somehow, prevent this from becoming
a contest of rivals postponed for 15 years.
  So far the tea ceremony had made his task easy.  It always slowed things
down.  Bremmer was preoccupied with his ritual of making, pouring and now
drinking tea; and Harry could, therefore, afford to let his mind wander,
to relieve the tension he felt.

HE recalled crossing the quadrangle earlier, after his late class, seeing
the evening sky stretched like some lustrous blue canvas over a notched
and ragged Gothic frame.  Students had moved through the dimly-lit cloisters
and among the deep shadows across the grass as always, laughing and talking.
  Harry had loved every step, the vistas he recognised and cherished.  From
one angle that piece of skyline was a blunt outcropping, a knob with no
real shape to it ... Another step or two and it sprang to life in silhouette,
the sudden brutal shadow-play of a gargoyle.
  And all across that placid, timeless backwater, Harry had been aware of
the two keys in his jacket pocket.  One for the closet, one for the box.
  Then he had allowed himself his first direct glimpse of Bremmer's mezzanine
&quot;garret&quot;, that quirky afterthought of a room bullied out of a landing where
two staircases met, never wanted really, till Gustav Bremmer, all
eccentricities and old world charm anyway, had seized on it.
  The Tates had been waiting for him on that side of the quad, near the
only tree in the south-east corner, Marilyn Tate easily recognisable, as
always, by her walking stick.
  It had been a short rise to Bremmer's office then; always deceptive, that.
You prepared yourself for a long climb, the full double-flight, and before
you knew it, Bremmer's door was peeping out at you, dark shiny wood, on
its mezzanine landing.  Students would always overshoot that door, mindlessly
climbing.
  Footsteps on those stairs distracted him.  Harry glanced at his watch.
  It was 6.32.  There was a knock at the door.
  Ben Markham had arrived.  Harry let the short middle-aged man in, introduced 
him and indicated a chair between Ross and himself.
  Bremmer had the grace to turn up his gas ring, though his &quot;Nice to see
you, Markham&quot; was hollow.  Harry could see he was enjoying himself immensely,
suspected he had as much curiosity as the rest of them.  After all, Bremmer,
too, had lived with this for 15 years.  He had put up with the locked closet
in his office and the locked box on the shelf behind the door, melodramatically
hidden behind the bookcase.
  Finally Markham's cup and the refills had been passed out and everyone
was ready.  The Tates and the students were looking from Markham to Professor
Bremmer to Harry Gellis, waiting for the proceedings to begin.
  It was Bremmer who spoke.  &quot;Go ahead, Markham.  Make your case.&quot;
  &quot;Let Harry tell it,&quot; Markham said, sipping his tea.
  A wise move, Harry thought.  Otherwise Bremmer would snort and guffaw
all through the account.  No.  Better he present Ben Markham's case himself.   
  Now the eyes were on him exclusively.
  Harry let a few moments pass, listened to the clock on the mantel above
the closed-up fireplace, and drank the last of his tea.  The room smelt
of waxed wood, books, and, faintly, of gas; but Harry had always loved it.
It was the poet's garret his imagination had never needed when he was younger,
and architectural marvel.
  &quot;Very well then, Mr and Mrs Tate, Charles, Sally,&quot; he said.  And he began.   
  He told of how, 16 years before, Ben Markham had started in the department
as a senior tutor and part-time lecturer, an earnest good-natured fellow
doing doctoral research into the psychology of anomalous experience.  Markham
performed his duties well.  He was popular with the students and with the
staff; and he satisfied Professor Bremmer's requirements.  At first.  As
the months passed, the events that were to end Markham's teaching career
occurred.  The first of these was an argument over Bremmer's pet theory
of Psychic Stain, whose publication by this usually most cautious head of
department had caused much comment.
  Harry broached this subject carefully.  He could not ridicule Markham
(who, in the end, thought enough of his own research to resign) and could
not afford to alienate Professor Bremmer even slightly.  It was a storyteller's
nightmare.
  &quot;The most challenging and least extravagant theory about hauntings,&quot; Harry
said, &quot;is that when a person dies, their released personality, their psyche,
their vitality, actually `stains' the room or locality in which that
personality terminates.  Like water-staining.  Out goes the light of life
- where does all that energy of self, of mind, go?  Has it imploded, sucked
through some sink-hole; or has it leapt outwards as some measurable quantity?
Professor Bremmer's view is that the liberated psyche does charge the
surroundings, and continues in a much vitiated half-life state.
  &quot;The nature and degree of psychic staining determines the manifestations
that other people later experience.  Sometimes individuals react differently
to these resonances and perceive different manifestations.  It's uneven,
of course.  Some places are stained for decades, even centuries.  Others
only for minutes, hours, weeks, surfacing in premonitions and what we call
frissons.  At one extreme, some people see ghosts and hear voices; at the
other there is just a feeling, uneasiness, inquietude.&quot;
  Harry glanced to see how Bremmer was reacting.  The old man nodded.
  There was no doubt that the Tates were engrossed by this.  They were clearly
looking for answers, watching Harry intently.
  &quot;Go on, Harry,&quot;  Bremmer said.
  &quot;Doctor Markham here had another quite new approach.  He was intrigued
by the notion that houses are haunted because they try to grow their own
people.&quot;  He paused.  &quot;In itself, that view caused no great trouble; it's
so hypothetical and intrinsically*instrinsically absurd.&quot;
  Now Harry looked at Ben; but Markham didn't flinch.  He understood Harry's
position.
  &quot;But Doctor Markham was offering it as a topic for seminar discussion,
a way for him to explore his views.  For one of his tutorials he found a
newspaper article listing how many people had been killed or wounded that
year by supposedly unloaded guns.  It was an incredibly high statistic;
and, between considering that and the notion that houses could haunt
themselves, he produced his own Form Follows Function theory.&quot; 
  &quot;Don't call it a theory, Harry,&quot; Bremmer interrupted.  &quot;It's an absurdity,
a quantum leap in pure waffle!  Theories have at least some empirical basis.
Some semblance of feasibility.  This notion of Markham's is the most dangerous
form of claptrap.  Guns growing their own bullets!  Houses growing ghosts!
Furniture growing people!  I'm a lenient man and I approve of theorising,
but a line has to be drawn.  This is abject nonsense!  Lunacy!&quot;
  &quot;Please continue, Harry,&quot; Markham said reasonably.

HARRY swallowed.  There was no way he could come out of this unscathed,
he realised.
  &quot;Doctor Markham's viewpoint is sensational and provocative to be sure,
supported - &quot; (He put this in for Bremmer and his own future) - &quot;by no one
anywhere else in the academic world.  His beliefs are his own; as revolutionary
in terms of scientific thinking as the round-Earth theory or evolution ever
were ... &quot;
  &quot;Wrong, Harry!&quot;  Bremmer said.  &quot;You give it the wrong emphasis - make
it seem a truth whose time has yet to come.  I don't know about the Tates
here, but for the sake of Miss Radbrook and Ross I'd prefer you say, like
a flat-Earth theory or a creationist one.&quot;
  &quot;Thank you, Harry,&quot;  Markham said.  &quot;I appreciate how difficult this is
for you.  But I am as fascinated now as I was then.  A farmer in the Riverina
shot by his father's unloaded rifle left in the attic.  He'd cleaned it
10 years before, taken it down to show round and clean again.  A policeman
in Adelaide killed by an unloaded service revolver.  Hunters.  A soldier
at Puckapunyal.  All in a three week period.  Too much to ignore, to attribute
to mere carelessness.
  &quot;Yes, for a gun a bullet is a causal proposition.  It exists only to receive,
hold and deal with a bullet.  An irresistible purpose; an incontrovertible
logic.  And what about houses?  Those with no deaths yet to stain the locale,
but filled with a presence all the same.  Not the restless spirits of the
departed shot into the surroundings in death trauma, but probably the casual
resonances of living people - induced by the presence of our psyches, our
spirits, our personas, day after day.  The magnetic fields of a person provide
a template, a living by-product of our being.  The used artefact is imprinted
with it, saturated.  Psychic stain, yes, but the stain of living forces
not terminated ones.  We impregnate our artefacts, load them with it.  Any
wonder there are ghosts, life echoes.  It helps to account for the melancholy
surrounding an armchair at a dump, a rusted bicycle in some dunes, ruins
in the desert, derelict cars in a wrecker's yard.    


</sample>
