By Julian Lloyd  

  The City. Greys and silver set in browns, in staggeringly high and miserably
low relief. The streets once flanked with green were torn and crevassed, and
walked by people who emerged lamely from the rank buildings when the rains
stopped. The City was a corpse, no longer a thriving and prosperous organism. 
  The Great Days were still there to be seen. Walk around and you would have
seen a thousand years of ambitions. There were buildings of confident elegance,
rows of honest terraces, and the huge monoliths of the Mad Engineers who had
built towers in the sky. But all the remains were hollow shadows, the skeleton
of that magnificent animal, the City. Here and there the last elements of life
in the City were being consumed by its paralysing disease, its people.
  There was a certain bar in the North decorated, inside and out, with a
hundred years of grime. Liquids slid down male and female throats as they
bantered and swayed, roaring with heavy laughter. A wide man behind a long bar
refilled smeared glasses with transparent or amber drink. The room was long
with windows down the side opposite the bar. It was mid-afternoon, but the only
light was from a few yellowish globes hanging from the ceiling.
  Dandurian sat behind a table in a corner. On the table was a bottle and
glass. His hands rested on the gun barrel he used for a walking stick. His
sloped forehead was heavy and finished in black, handsome eyebrows. From the
cavities below, his eyes stared in two different directions simultaneously,
each with individual and perfect comprehension. His nose was arch and fat, his
lips clenched lust. He watched the laughing clowns. They could feel the stare
but in their euphoria ignored it. He, too, was amused when a clown toppled
over, for people's weakness thoroughly pleased him. He watched on until the
evening. New arrivals made a point to greet Dandurian. A nod, and offer of
refreshment, but not conversation. He accepted the dues with the barest use of
an eye.
  Whilst watching he considered other matters. He thought, as always, of those
left in the City who were rich. In proportion they were few and decreasing,
yet there were still enough. They were small, startling flashes of iridescence
in the poor monotonom, made greater because they were so visible to those who
still had the heart for avariciousness. 
  There were few who knew anyghing of the birth of the City, or how it had
slowly grown grasping, and gaining its strength. How through work and poverty
it had eventually blossomed into energy and ideas, richness beyond
comprehension, its influence felt throughout the globe.
  But those were the old days, long passed. They were before the people of the
City discovered that the essence of life was pleasure.
  Dandurian was a final result of all this although he had no perspective of
the City's past. He was unusual. There were few who had real desire. Dandurian
had a crude and substantial energy and the lines of his plotting and his ego
were closing. He considered Dizz, envying such wealth matched with so pleasing
a demeanour. Dizz was the Owner of the City, no one knew the extent of his
fortune, but for some hereditary reason, more in the minds of the people than
in fact, Dizz had an absolute power which was never used. It was an illusion
grown fat because it was never tested. Dandurian saw this, saw that Dizz had no
mechanics of power, and that Dizz was effete to the point of lunacy. Quite
charming and quite unable to make the simplest decision since he never had to.
His pleasures, none of them very disturbing, were all thought up for him by
others.
  Dizz sat in a deep leather armchair inside a machine that moved a dozen feet
above the ground through the City on a noisy throb of supporting air, gripping
height and then losing it to slip down a few feet again. The machine was large
and the room that Dizz sat in was expansive and lavish. His steward stood
attentively by him, selecting the moment to place a glass in his hand, or a
cigar between his lips. And Dizz enjoyed it in his way, having moved far beyond
the bounds of boredom.
  Outside, on top of a high serrated metal building, a girl watched the machine
sailing between the monoliths. This was Illy. She stood precipitately at the
edge, looking down, defying gravity as she leant to observe, a hundred storeys
above the street.
  Illy from the gutter. She was once there she remembers. In the concrete shell
filled with people. She remembers none of them. No faces, no names. Nothing.
  Faint coloured hair hung down by her white face. Her eyes were the palest
green, so pale that sometimes there was no colour.
  The machine rose fifty feet towards her to pass close beneath as she looked
down, the whirling suction brought her teetering to the edge, yet she did
nothing to balance herself. She stared through the window to see the most
aquiline face as the machine passed, leaving her isolated, high over the vast
morass of the City.

         TWO  

  The Theatre for Evolutionary Thought. Once the whole City had voted for
people to lead it and to make its decisions. But over the years they had become
bored with doing this, since it never seemed to matter. The Theatre was started
as a joke and required all its members to have a list of Five Hundred
supporters to acquire a seat, the list to be renewed every five years. It
became oddly successful since it was so amusing. It acquired considerable
influence for a while before it also went into decline. Yet it was still there.
And Dandurian had bought himself a list of Five Hundred. He stood before the
Theatre. The Members shouted at him, `Words speak louder than actions! Words
speak louder than actions!' But the cast in Dandurian's eye unsettled them and
each had the sensation that he was being directly selected. Their shouting had
no body to it.
  `The bastions of thought must be seen to be thinking,' he said to them, to
create temporary confusion. He continued in the lull, `The right ideas must
make an impact. Mine will. My friends,' he appealed, `the time is right.'
  `Obscene,' they cried, `obscene, leave. Leave.' `Long live the Evolution,' he
said. They repeated the phrase because they had to. It was etiquette. When they
finished he stared at them, two at a time, in the silence. They shifted
uncomfortably, two at a time.
  They sat uneasily in rows in front of him that rose fan shaped from the
stage. Dandurian stood belligerently looking at them, bent aggressively forward
from the waist, leaning on his gun barrel walking stick. Once he'd surveyed
them he sneered and spat in front of the benches. They didn't like it but, as
ever, their courage failed them and they sat, each hoping another would do
something. Dandurian, sensing this, laughed loudly. How he laughed! Fear is the
master.
  He returned to his room in a poor district in the north of the City. The door
swore as he pushed it and he spat on the filth covered floor as a rotten stench
filled his nostrils. He hurled his gun barrel at the pile of paper in the
corner and the young girl sleeping in it moaned at the ritual. She woke and
looked at him: `Yeah baster, whadst want?'
  `Food, drink. Manners too girl. Manners. Now.'
  `And what baster? I begs it do I? Or sleeps forrit. Yeah?'
  `No time. Here.' He threw some coins at her. `Go.' She crawled from under the
papers, naked and scrawny, scrambled up the money, put on the two bits of
clothing she had, and went.
  He felt an odd sense of remorse as she slammed the door. Gone. One day for
ever? He couldn't afford her. But fourteen! Ah now that's right my angel.
Fourteen and his as he pleased. That such pleasure should be his. His by
rights, as compensation for life. Yes, compensation. Not enough. Now so much
more would become his because he had found the secret. He stroked the stick of
dynamite that lay on the table.

         THREE  

  The exclusive party had been clinking its way through iced, pale pink
cocktails for two hours. Beautifully cultured voices rose like contraltos above
the melee of sound.
  The General talked to Margot d'Armandine, the famous ballerina. `Of course,
tragedy is inherent in everyday events. Even the most commonplace.
Only this evening I nicked myself shaving, not a small matter in itself, but so
much worse if one has an engagement afterwards.' The diminutive Margot
d'Armandine raised herself on her toes to peer with her pointed face at the
General's chin.
  `You poor dear' she said, brushing his cheek with her long fingers.
  The party was thrown by Belladonna. She had large ebony eyes which shone with
an alien kindness. That night she wore a dress of fine silk, and gold chains
which hung from her waist to the floor and split up her long, dark legs as she
walked. She talked to Ballantine, a pompous industrialist, pompous with
everyone but her. `Ballantine, you're looking so handsome tonight.'
`Belladonna, not as handsome as you ...' He began to stammer.
  `I know, dear Ballantine. You're very sweet. And are your engines grinding
well?'
  `Yes. Indeed. They purr as sweetly as your Cheshire cat.'
  `Fine engines! They mean so much to us all, in these days.'
  `Yes' he said, his face crimsoning as it puffed up, `yes.'
  `Ah!' said Bella as she heard the thudding in the air, `Dizz is to arrive.
Shall we go to meet him!' She took Ballantine by the elbow and threw him
through the people towards the glass doors.
  Dizz's noble, aquiline head rested, quite empty, against the padded leather.
The steward prized open his fingers and placed a glass of alcohol and ice in
them. Sensing the cold Dizz lifted his hand to his lips and drank. The steward
smiled with satisfaction.
  Dizz flew slowly through the night, at times so close to the City's towers
that he heard the words of the squarming people; senseless, meaningless things.
He could see them playing, eating, staring at nothing. At times they hovered
just a few feet from the ground above the worst streets in the northern zone of
the City, the violent zones. People looked up from the crumbling streets as he
passed, shielding their eyes from the air. The machine moved slowly along,
casting shadows of red, green and white that illuminated upturned faces.
  Hearing the noise the street girl of fourteen ran out of a bar where men with
gross fumed breath had been pressing coins in her hand. She stared up as the
machine slowly passed over.
  Opposite, looking from his window, Dandurian saw both her and Dizz
simultaneously, one eye focused on each. The violence of opposite emotions made
his face jerk and his skin ooze a thin slime. He could smell his own hatred.
  Then the machine increased its energy and climbed unsteadily away to the
West, to the Great Tower where Belladonna waited. 
  When the street girl returned the food she brought was thrown across the
room, a brown mess to lie rotting for many years. And she was hit as she took
off her clothes. Dandurian clawed blood from her thin flesh, his saliva
dribbling on her head, as he mounted her.
  The machine ascended to the top of the Great Tower where a crowd had come
outside to greet Dizz. At the front was Belladonna with Ballantine.
  The steward deftly retrieved the precious glass as Dizz got out. Belladonna
stepped forward and the two greatest smiles of the City flashed at each other
like bursts of neon lights, a great spectacle of the times.
  `So kind!' said Belladonna as Dizz moved in to take her hand and kiss her
cheek, his eyes brimming with assumed delight.

