<sample>
	<id> N03 </id>
	


	<note> 2002 words </note>
	


	<source> Operation sea dragon </source>
	


	<bl> By Ronald Botsjtsuk </bl>
	


	<h> CHAPTER 4 </h>
	

	<h> On the Gun Line </h>
	

  The next three days were sheer bedlam. We underwent round-the-clock,
simulated attacks and emergency procedures as we gradually approached the
recognised war zone off Vietnam.
  Every conceivable eventuality and strike method was contrived by the command.
Codes, various attack patterns, and highly confidential - if not top secret
- messages were analysed and discussed. Room for error was minimal.
  The unrelenting pressure, lack of sleep and continual rehearsed action
stations made us feel like robots. Consensus replaced minor friction between
rank and personalities as we approached the war zone. Personal gripes about
duty rosters and pay scales seemed insignificant now.
  HMAS Hobart became an active member of the U.S. Seventh Fleet when she
sailed for the Quang Ngai Province, relieving the U.S.S. Fechteler.
  It was hard to believe we were in hostile waters. One could easily have
mistaken the not-too-distant coastline for any hilly terrain off Australia.
  &quot;You wouldn't think that peaceful-looking place was at war, would you?&quot;
I commented drawing on my cigarette.
  &quot;No, but those crafty buggers are out there all right. Probably having
smoko,&quot; yawned Les, removing his sweat-stained shirt. Even late into the
evening, the humidity was intense. 
  &quot;Talk about smoko, there is something burning out there.&quot; I pointed to
a distant, incandescent fire rising from the densely vegetated horizon.
  &quot;Yeah, I can just make it out,&quot; said Les, straining his googly eyes.
Nightfall was descending on us rapidly like a black velvet curtain.
  All of a sudden we heard the distinct thrum of chopper blades and spotted
two specially fitted Chinook helicopter gunships, darting menacingly about
in the area. We also heard small arms returning their fire. Judging by the
erratic firing, it was not easy for the Viet Cong to pinpoint the choppers, but 
we had no trouble seeing the rockets and strafing bullets being fired from the
gunships. These looked like a series of red-dotted lines flashing into the
forest. Next moment there was a loud explosion, followed by a massive, raging
fire. The gunships had obviously destroyed their target and immediately
returned to their nearby base.
  &quot;This is better than watching a flick,&quot; reckoned Les before we returned
inside.
  We noticed several duty watch ratings hurriedly fixing the opaque black covers
over every porthole. This procedure was repeated every evening and was
officially referred to as &quot;blackening ship&quot;. In addition, all external lighting
would be extinguished, except the one internationally compulsory steaming light
right above our masthead. It was a clever security ploy, which in effect
disguised the ship. For all the light we were emitting, we could easily be
mistaken for a fishing vessel, a beacon, or even an aircraft carrier. No-one
could be sure of anything in the pitch black darkness of tropical night. 
  Except for emergencies, strict radio silence was imposed. While operating
with ships and aircraft of the American Seventh Fleet, our secret codes
changed daily.
  At 0600 on March 31 before anyone had a chance to relax or become complacent,
the long awaited alarm was sounded for action stations; we were near Cap
Mia.
  &quot;Did he say for exercise or not?&quot; Les asked leaping off his bunk.
  &quot;No, mate, this is it! The real McCoy. Let's go,&quot; I cried, feeling my heart
thump against my chest. Like many others I had high expectations and was
full of enthusiasm.
  Hans had scurried up the hatch as if he were abandoning ship. I had never
seen him move so fast. John was already on watch in the operations room.
  Upon entering the crowded ops room, which resembled a command centre in
a movie scene, I couldn't help but wonder what was in store for us. Would
we get hit? Who might get killed? Will I survive, I wondered as I manned
my all-too-familiar radar set.
  &quot;What's the target, Les?&quot; I impatiently asked before the Captain told his
concerned crew over the amplified intercom.
  &quot;A Viet Cong assembly point, ammunition supplies and some of the bad guys,&quot;
said Les, using humour to settle his nerves.
  Anxious moments later our gunnery officer shouted into his mouthpiece,
&quot;Fire for effect 2 salvoes - Fire!&quot;
  This command historically ordered Hobart's two rapid firing guns into
action for the first time in wartime conditions. It was also Australia's
first direct naval involvement since Korea.
  After some minor gunnery corrections we obliterated the assembly area to 
smithereens in less than forty minutes of saturated shelling.
  &quot;That's letting 'em know we are here,&quot; I proudly remarked to no-one in
particular while our guns bellowed.
  Our debut on the Gun Line was brief and effective, like a boxer's knock-out
punch. We remained unscathed and noone returned our fire. At this stage
of our involvement I wasn't disappointed.
  By April Fool's Day the following morning, HMAS Hobart had fired her
hundredth round of high explosive 5-inch shells on enemy territory.
  Hobart's initial purpose was to provide naval gunfire support for U.S.
Marines and ARVN Forces (South Vietnam's regular army comprising 410,000
men). Our main operations concentrated in the southern Quang Ngai Province,
which was ninety miles south of Da Nang, the major port of the central
lowlands.
  Our targets included Viet Cong supply points, truck convoys and ammunition
dumps. We were frequently asked to give urgent assistance to outflanked
marine patrols. On such occasions our gunfire had to be executed with pinpoint
accuracy. Often relying on a set of co-ordinates given to us by a cornered
marine commander, who could, for example, expect our shells to fall as close
as 20 metres away on a Viet Cong mortar position.
  The most significant engagement during that type of amphibious warfare
was an operation code named &quot;Beacon Torch&quot;.
  Bong! Bong! Bong! &quot;Hands to action stations! Hands to action stations.
Assume full condition one state Zulu&quot; - Bong! Bong! Bong! came from the
crowded bridge at 0430 hours that particular morning. All exposed personnel
were wearing marine-type anti-flack jackets and protective helmets.
  &quot;Come on youse lot, move it. We haven't got all day!&quot; urged our Leading
Hand keen to clear our mess deck. &quot;Let's waste some `commos'!&quot; came Hans'
typical war cry.
  The whole mess deck was vacated and secured for watertight integrity in
near record time.
  &quot;L.W.O.2 long-range radar manned and operating,&quot; Hans reported, adjusting
his focus and eager to cause wholesale destruction among the Viet Cong.
  &quot;Short-range surveillance manned and operating,&quot; I snapped.
  &quot;Gun-plot manned,&quot; came the reports from the rear of the now bustling
ops room.
  Up and down the line, from every corner of the ship, came rapid confirmation
of personnel closed up at their various positions.
  &quot;This is the Captain speaking.&quot; We were now all ears. &quot;Overnight we were
joined by the U.S.S. Harry E. Hubbard and the amphibious assault ship U.S.S.
Tripoli, which is leading a group of amphibious landing ships.
  &quot;In approximately ten minutes, we'll begin our heavy shore bombardment
on a designated Viet Cong stronghold and elements of the North Vietnamese
Army. The bombardment should last thirty minutes. All guns will then cease,
and an amphibious landing operation entitled &quot;Beacon Torch&quot; will be launched
from the Tripoli. These forces will then be joined by an infantry battalion of
U.S. Marines and supporting artillery ashore in two flanking positions.
We will remain in the area until the operations is completed and will give
available naval gunfire support when asked by units ashore. The time for
action stations this morning was excellent, so keep up the good work. That
is all.&quot;
  Our external communication frequency was amplified in the ops room as
static background and instructions flowed continually. The enthusiastic
Captain darted from the bridge and joined &quot;Guns&quot; by the illuminated plotting
table for a final consultation. His index finger was poised like a trigger
on his communication mouthpiece.
  &quot;Open the hatch and have a sticky beak,&quot; Les suggested quietly, referring
to the emergency exit near my bulkhead. After reporting another range and
bearing of the Tripoli's updated position I opened it hesitantly. What we
saw in those few seconds stunned us. There were countless landing crafts
bobbing up and down like corks in a bathtub, laden to the hilt with frightened
and heavily armed young U.S. Marines, about to hit the beach. The spectacle
was awesome. I could not help but feel sorry for those poor fellows about
to face direct enemy fire. We were so close that I could vividly see the
pale, shocked expression on some of their faces. Many of them looked no
more than eighteen years of age, and they clutched their carbine rifles with
all their might. I quickly secured the hatch again and resumed giving accurate
alterations. That scene on our action-packed starboard side made us appreciate
the gravity of the situation. It made us more determined and eager to report
every range and bearing with deadly accuracy, thus assisting the impending
assault in whatever way possible. 
  That's the least we can do for the poor bastards, I thought.
  &quot;Stand by,&quot; the Captain said, waiting for the precise second. Then in
a voice hardened by determination, he ordered, &quot;Fire!&quot;
  &quot;Five salvoes fire!&quot; came the spontaneous order from Guns who was in direct
communication with the senior ratings in the gun turrets. They could not wait 
to release the venomous fire power of the forward and aft 5-inch rapid firing
guns and become involved in this major assault. The barrels roared forth
in ferocious sequence.
  Minutes later we received the necessary altered coordinates from a
low-flying modified World War II Skyraider. These planes were used effectively
in this rugged terrain for spotting and giving gun alterations.
  &quot;Roger, left 20 up 15,&quot; acknowledged a senior gunnery rating on the same
frequency, which was promptly relayed to the respective gun bays. When all
guns were fixed directly over their targets, our stimulated gunnery officer
immediately ordered, &quot;Stand by - 15 salvoes - Fire.&quot; And off they blasted,
virtually all on target. 51 and 52 were the call signs given to our forward
and aft gun turrets respectively.
  Les wished he had some coloured pins to stab in his board, depicting enemy gun 
emplacements. &quot;Where are those bloody gun batteries?&quot; he cried, disappointed.
  &quot;Don't worry, you'll get them soon enough, don't rush it,&quot; I predicted,
not in any particular hurry to get shot at.
  &quot;Think of those poor pricks out there in those lousy barges. I'd be shitting
myself,&quot; I admitted.
  &quot;All the bloody Yanks had to do was drop another A-bomb on Hanoi. This
is doing it the hard way.&quot; Hans declared quite seriously. It was a radical
view we chose to ignore.
  For the next nerve-racking hour the guns fired shell after shell, vibrating
every millimetre of the ship's superstructure and our vulnerable eardrums.
The only temporary reprieve came when they were firing consecutively rather
than all together. The U.S. ships and our ship fired a blanket of steel in
shore bombardment.
  &quot;Cease firing! Cease firing 51 and 52,&quot; ordered our stoic captain.
  This brought a temporary lull and a chance for the red-hot gun-barrels
to cool down. Communications frequencies were then monitored with the various
wirelesses carried by the marines who were about to launch their assault.
I was sure they would be hoping that the combined ships' fire power had
effectively silenced whatever resistance they might encounter ashore. Our
best wishes went with the marines as they ploughed their way towards the
smouldering beachhead in that long line of barges.
  We were silent, waiting nervously for any instructions from the marine
commanders who were now assembling their anxious men into a fighting unit.
All seemed relatively quiet on the battle front as the landing barges lowered
their front ends. The marines poured out and sought cover before regrouping
and charging through the dense vegetation.
  Just when we smugly thought the ships' guns had destroyed whatever
opposition the area contained, all hell broke loose. Concentrations of
attacking Viet Cong emerged out of fortified concrete bunkers and foxholes
like teeming rats. Many marines were slaughtered in a surprise assault while
crossing a hill. 
            

</sample>
