<sample>
	<id> N07 </id>
	


	<note> 2004 words </note>
	


	<source> Quadrant - November 1986 </source>
	


	<h> Kalgoorlie Alice </h>
	


	<bl> By Shane McCauley </bl>
	

IN THE DARKNESS of the lane-way the shadowy thing had looked like a giant
toad squatting, hind parts against the brick. He had looked and stumbled
into the same wall, fifteen feet away from the now gurgling shadow. He saw
faint light coursing with the meandering trickle of urine.
  &quot;What ya lookin' at?&quot; asked the shadow, now gaining a third dimension
as an arm appeared. The brandy tap-danced behind his eyes and he couldn't
find an answer to the hoarse female voice.
  Raymond Christopher had arrived in Kalgoorlie the previous day, putting
up at one of the cheapest hotels. The path which had brought him through
this day to this particular alley-way had become even more confused in his
mind than the purposeless reality. A little earlier in the evening he'd
tried explaining to the tattooed roo-shooter who had asked him the inevitable
question in the adjacent bar.
  &quot;I came here because I wanted to feel clean. I wanted to feel that I could
just be me and get away from the past. No strings. No letters to write.
Nothing ... Thanks, I will - nice drop this Hannan's ... My old dream of
standing alone on the mountain. And here I am, on the edge of a desert.
When I was a boy I wondered why they changed the guard at Buckingham Palace.
Why they changed anything. Here nothing changes. Except the shadows.&quot;
  Cornwall, the roo-shooter, had downed his brandy, belched, and turned
watery grey eyes upon him.
  &quot;How old are you?&quot;
  &quot;Twenty-eight. But that's not ...&quot; Here Raymond had been interrupted by
an old-timer crashing between them, bringing a whisky-flooded breath with
him from out of the night.
  &quot;I've jush had all me teesh out. Need drink.&quot;
  Overwhelmed by the dazed sadness in the man's eyes, and choked by the
festering whisky smell, Raymond had barely managed to reach the outside
lane-way before he was briefly, but unequivocably, sick. It was there that
the amphibious female shape had clambered out of the darkness at him.
  &quot;I said what ya lookin' at? Christ, but look at him! Ha, ha, ha, ha!&quot;
The laugh sounded more like a buffalo's death-throes.
  Raymond wiped his chin with the back of his hand and looked at the shape,
an Aboriginal woman he now remembered seeing earlier sitting on some steps
outside a house in one of the nearby back-streets.
  &quot;You'd bedder sid down an' 'ave 'nother drink. Doan mine Alice, she's
gotta piss somewheres an' 'can't go in the pub. Threw me out an' busted
two of me fingers last time I wend in theres.&quot; She crumpled beside Raymond,
hands still gripping a half-empty bottle of wine. He, too, slumped and felt
the spirit of the surrounding desert pass him by, pausing only to ruffle
his black hair with its blacker breath. I don't think I can walk, he kept
thinking, floating out of himself and forgetting the presence beside him.
A high-pitched yell came from a window near them and sliced up to the stars.
  &quot;You call me a poofter again, and I'll cut your fuckin' throat!&quot; Alice
laughed again while Raymond threw up the remnants of his sticky brandy and
beer. He turned and watched the powerful action of her dark, elastic throat
as she sucked at the wine bottle. He vaguely tried to guess her age, couldn't
and was tempted to close his eyes, resisting as he heard his brain chuckle
menacingly at the prospect. This time last week I'd just finished a week's
respectable work at the bank, he thought; now I'm seven hundred kilometres
away, rapidly drinking up my dreams, sitting in a damp alley with an Aboriginal
woman who's liable to rob me the minute I pass out, perhaps even helping
the process along with her bottle. He looked up at the stars and suddenly,
almost guiltily, felt irrationally refreshed, as if he'd awoken from a doze
at the beach. He took the bottle the pink and black hand passed him and
drank a little, tentatively, ready to stop at the first sign of his body's
rebellion. None came. The night can begin again, you bloody fool. Inside
the pub, Cornwall finished telling the story of his marriage and his &quot;bitch
of a wife&quot;, tore up her photo, and deposited the fragments into the warming
froth of a beer glass.
  &quot;What's your name?&quot; Raymond heard himself asking.
  &quot;Alice. Alice Rumsbody I was called. Funny, isn't it?&quot;
  &quot;Alice is a pretty enough name. I'm Raymond.&quot;
  &quot;Raymon'. Never knew nobody called that. 'nother drink?&quot;
  He refrained this time, beginning to enjoy the apparent revival of his
senses. When in Perth he had become increasingly aware that he was losing
his essential personality, becoming disembodied, or rather at the disposal
of too many other bodies. Too often he wallowed in painful nostalgia, recurring
images of himself at his first dance, of his first kiss, his first &quot;adult&quot;
nights out with his friends. His spare moments had become so full of these
mental images of the past that he'd become frightened, thinking he would
never recapture sensations of newness and self-discovery. And then something
about the gold-fields attracted him, perhaps that they, too, were remnants,
leftovers, from a more bustling period of history. A friend had written
a book on the Golden Mile, and this decided him on wanting to share the
atmosphere suggested by the anecdotes and historical narrative. Unfortunately,
a developing proclivity, a facility, for getting drunk had descended upon
him at a similar time, combined with the frustration that comes with a failure
to find sufficient self-excuses for the condition.
  Raymond edged his way back to the alley wall.
  &quot;I feel like walking. Need to clear my head.&quot;
  &quot; 'sallright. I'll come with ya.&quot; Even in the darkness he could see that
teeth in the side of her mouth were missing. Yet there was some bluff,
attractive quality about her that didn't seem entirely buried in, or
unrecoverable from, blunted living.
  Raymond Christopher and Alice Rumsbody walked hesitantly into the street.
The earlier, casual wind had fed upon itself and was now blowing strongly.
Paper and leaves jumped up and twisted in the light that stained the street
like tobacco-juice. Broken glass was scattered near a drain. Raymond had
little idea of where he was going, just a vague thought that he would like
to see the heaps of mineral waste, the mesas, in the dawn, hours away. Alice
seemed to accept that this man knew his destination; all of the others
had. They passed some railway sidings. The railway cars carrying farm machinery
looked as if they were being mounted, methodically raped, by their cargo.
Alice drank again, while Raymond sang under his breath.
  &quot;Christopher Robin went down with Alice, they're changing the guard at
Buckingham Palace.&quot;
  &quot;What you singing?&quot;
He repeated the lines.
  &quot;Did you make that up?&quot;
  &quot;No. I remember my mother singing it to me when I was about five. It's
funny how nonsense makes sense in the end. If you wait long enough. If you
forget that you are waiting.&quot;
  &quot;My mum sang to me, too. She made hers up. We was given a little book
of songs by some white peoples, but she couldn't read. She sang a bit 'fore
she died. Chuberculosis, the priest said.&quot;
  Raymond accidentally kicked an empty can that sent a hollow sound echoing
along the nearly empty street. A few youths passed, laughing, on the other
side. One of them shouted something at them, but Raymond didn't understand
it. Not that it mattered. A white ute drove past them, accelerating as it
went. Cornwall was going home to an empty house, to commit murder again in his
sleep. He recognised Raymond as he went past, and snorted to himself.
  &quot;Black bitches is better than white. At least you don't expect them to
stay with you.&quot; And he leaned forward to switch on his radio. The next day
every kangaroo he shot would have mascaraed eyes and pouting lips.
  &quot;Just a minute,&quot; said Alice. &quot;I'll be back 'mmediately.&quot; Raymond watched
her half-run, half-walk into the absolute shadows of a street full of
ramshackle houses. He kept on walking, slowly, almost hoping the woman would
catch him up. He realised that he would soon be out of town. Several of
the houses he passed had dim, furtive lights within them, and he wondered
who lived there. At least this is not a city of concrete playing-cards,
the Kings and Aces stretching up to grate and flick the sky; the humble
neon here doesn't affront the stars too much. As he thought this, conscious
of his own bombast, one little star streaked towards the invisible horizon
and vanished, absorbed into night's blotting paper. Raymond began to feel
cold and weary, but determined to keep walking, putting off the horrible
inevitability of waking from drunken sleep. &quot;Vulnerability,&quot; he muttered.
From one front yard came the sinister sounds of washing hanging on the line.
Like ghosts clapping. Then road forked and sign-posts mouthed names blankly
at the night. Boulder, Kambalda, Coolgardie.
  Alice couldn't see Raymond ahead as she hurried along the street, a new
and unopened bottle of wine in her hand. Her loose, claret-coloured dress
hampered her. Wheezing, she looked down at the white flashing of her sneakers
on the ageing bitumen. It was a bad, desolate night to be lonely, and she
wanted to find this man again. Even though he had not given her anything.
Sores on the backs of her ankles pained her, and her thighs felt watery
and were stinging. Then she saw him walking, stumbling, by some bedraggled
gum trees on the fringes of the town. The wine she had drunk hugged itself
closer to her blood. She felt the evening conspire in her, hearing strange
atavistic chants in her heart. She was aware of her own smallness, and her
lips were arched in the defeated bow of a smile.
  Raymond heard the shuffling and panting behind him and waited. He saw
the wide-opened eyes and approaching smile, not understanding them. Her
motivelessness pleased him.
  &quot;Why doan we stop heres! Walked 'nough, ain'tcha?&quot;
  &quot;If I stop now I might never get up.&quot;
  &quot;Eh? I went back for this.&quot; Raymond saw her raise the full bottle of wine
above her head as it it were the head of a fallen foe.
  &quot;Good girl.&quot; Her smell came to him on one of the pulsating gusts of wind.
A smell of moist cotton, alcohol, and surprisingly gentle sweat that he
fancied he could see forming between rich brown pores. It was an exciting
combination, somehow combining fruitfulness and decay. On another occasion,
at an office-party, he'd become aware of the smell of chicken on his fingers,
cold and pale, and that odour had depressed him and been with him for days.
He'd thought that death must smell of cold chicken and three-day old flowers.
He took the bottle from Alice and drank.
  &quot;Do you know how to get to those big heaps of waste that are near the
abandoned derricks?&quot;
  &quot;Oh yeah. Near here. Why you want them?&quot;
  &quot;Might be a good place to sleep.&quot;
  Raymond lit two cigarettes and passed one to Alice. In the blackness near
them a small marsupial swallowed a worm.
  They remained silent as they walked, stopping only once while Raymond
turned off the road to urinate on a jagged clump of scrub. He'd only seen
the great slabs of mineral waste before when driving, and had always wanted
to come back to them. Without a moon it was difficult to determine their
exact dimensions. As they walked toward the mesas, Raymond remembered what
they reminded him of: the illustrations of a Sumerian city that he'd seen
in one of his father's books. There was the same bland impassiveness about
them, a defiance and potential strength that was coiled in the grey mud
hearts of these abandoned pieces of sludge. There was something pointless
and laboured about them that made them peculiarly man-like.
                         

</sample>
