A vision of flames By Susan Clarke Saturday:  
The flames are licking at me - greedy, searing fingers,
trying to pluck at the nightdress I hold tightly about me -
a useless nylon cocoon. The heat is becoming unbearable; I feel
my face aflame with it and the sweat that slips between my
breasts and shoulder blades is making prickly trails. I feel
mesmerised. The room is dancing before my eyes, and I should
escape. Every bone, every fibre of my being is echoing, "Run,
run", but I can't. There is someone else here - still, perhaps
sleeping ...
   There's a window in this room. All I have to do is drag him
across to it. The inner rooms are already ablaze. I know they
are. This is the last to go. I must get out. We must get out.
   I look across to the window, still not touching the figure
- not attempting to do what my instincts are screaming at me
to do. Outside I see vague lights arcing across and it confuses
me.
   Where am I? I must find out. This is the second time I have
been here. The second ...
   Then, abruptly I cool. The second time. The sweat is making
me shiver now. It's night time and I know that I'm home, safe
in my bed with my husband's gently slumbering figure beside me.
The sheets are damp where I lie and this is a dream.
   I will my eyes to open, whispering to myself. "It's just a
dream, just a dream ... "
   Across the familiarity of our bedroom, the flames are still
superimposed. Frightening, destructive flames, framing the
window - the moving, misshapen window and I try to will it to
be still, to let my eyes focus on it: to discover, to learn
where I am.
   But it fades, just out of my cognition and I feel a hopeless
despair.
   It wasn't just a bad dream. This was the second night of its
appearance. So I must find out more about it, be more aware,
more observant when it comes for the third time. I have a
responsibility that no-one else can share and no-one that I
know can understand. I am a psychic.
   "What is it, love?" my husband's sleep-blurred voice comes
to me as I lie, stiff and damp. His hand reaches across to pull
me closer, but stills against my nightdress and a frown furrows
his brow. "You're ill." A statement that sounds faintly
accusing.
   I wish I could confide in him. He's such a gentle man
really, but remote and in some ways untouchable in human
things. He hates mistakes and never dreams and he doesn't
believe in precognition or deja vu. He'd never believe me, so
I roll from his presence and go to the drawers to retrieve a
fresh nightdress and enter the bathroom.
   Warm water, beating hard against my skin. I even let it
envelop my face to wash away the ashes and sweat marks I'm sure
must be there. It's always like this. So real. At least the
water can wash away the sticky aftermath of my vision. But
still, the thought persists, `I must help him' and I close my
eyes to let myself drift back. It began with me standing in the
room - no clues. It was a plain wooden room - old fashioned
- but I couldn't see properly. The flames - they keep coming
back.
   Even here in the sanctuary of my shower I can feel them. The
prickles of heat, and the sharp stream of water are becoming
one -
   "Are you all right in there?" my husband's voice seemed to
penetrate. At least I didn't have a chance to become totally
enveloped in it this time. The thought of becoming a living
flame terrifies me. That man. I mustn't let it happen to him.

 Sunday:  
I don't want to fall asleep. Not tonight. I know that I will
have that fiery vision again and it frightens me - the flames
and the fear of failure. I must try to disassociate myself from
it - to be objective. But it'll be difficult because I tend
to be swept along with the tides of my emotions. My husband
should have been the psychic. He shoulders responsibility with
such admirable calm and can be so objective when it's needed.
     I astounded him tonight. I dragged such passion from him
with my urgent love-making that he looked strangely at me
afterwards as if he suspected that I were cheating on him.
Perhaps I am in a way, because I dare not reveal my secret
self. He'd laugh and suspect my sanity or even worse, pat me
on the head and smile condescendingly as if he were humouring
an imaginative child, who doesn't know any better, and I need
help right now. I feel older than he could ever be because I
know that only I can help that slumbering man - save him or
ignore him and let his death be inevitable. I would be his
murderer then. My neglect would have murdered him by proxy, by
fire. The house is silent except for the steady rhythm of my
husband's breath. I am filled with a warm lethargy that deters
movement. Outside a breeze is rising. I can hear it teasing at
the leaves. Strange, I can hear the sound of the whisper of a
pine. Two pine trees, maybe more. They crest a hill and
overshadow a wooden cottage. I can feel their needles coarse
beneath my bare toes and hear the cones exploding as they burn.
   Burn.
   A fire is burning in the cottage and the wind, it fairly
hisses through the broken window there.
   The room; it seems to appear about me. Panelled, not for
effect, but in old-fashioned board from boarded ceiling to
floor: a floor already licked with flames, snaking towards me.
Automatically, I gather the crumpled skirt of my nightdress to
me, moving away from them. They have entered through the second
door to the room, they have entered - the one leading inside,
and the fire is burning cleanly, with little smoke so far.
   I try to tell myself that I am an observer - this is not
happening to me, but my body reacts to the fear, pulling away
from the fiery tongues. My arms are already covered with the
sheen of my sweat.
   The man; the only reason I am here. In my dream form, I
cannot touch him to warn him. How can he just sleep on? The
fire roars as it moves through the tinder dry house. If only
I could see him more closely. From where I stand he looks tired
in his sleep with lines of weariness and an undeserved age
etched into his face.
   But the momentary glimpse does not last long, for already
the heat is affecting my vision. The clear lines of a moment
ago are beginning to move insidiously, just blurring the edge
of their clarity. Soon the vision will end. I feel it and
desperately look for something, some clue to where this might
be.
   Help me. What a useless cry. I have to succeed ... by
myself.
   I can see only two windows in the room at present. One
displays a lurid orange-red mockery of its normal view; gutted
gums are grim and the ashes of an old fire have lost their
almost obscene pristine white colour. They all move in a
primitive dance of exultation. The cottage had been saved once
when a fire had marched to its very door, but it would not be
now. It would go and it's occupant with it.
   I shake my head in a defiance that I do not feel. It takes
all my will power to tear my eyes from the scene framed there.
   I will not be wooed from my task, even though I feel that
I am fixed to the floor now until my vision ends. I cannot
fight through the curtain of smoke and fire.
   The window. It's still the same. Almost obscured by smoke,
the second window tantalises me. I make a useless rub at my
eyes, but pain sears through them as if I have really got ashes
in them. They feel red raw from it and nearly all of me is
demanding the vision to cease, to give me respite from the heat
and the noise. Time to think and collate what I've seen into
some sort of order, but my rational self tells me that I must
not lose this opportunity. It will be my last. Three visions,
and three days and my dream-spun prophecy will come about. With
every bit of strength I can manage, I focus on the window but
even as I do so I can feel my strength sapped from me as I fall
downwards into oblivion that is both frustration and relief.

 Monday:  
I know he'll consider me eccentric - at least, mildly -
but I feel defiant. I've got a mission, a frantic fevered cause
and I need his help.
   It was like a blazened pointer when I picked up the local
newspaper and saw his ad. Hypnotherapy and one of its uses -
memory. It was the recall I needed - the ability to move the
vision in slow motion and to discern the arc of lights I saw
in my vision. Somehow that window had become important in an
obsessive way. It was the key. I've even tabulated all the
facts that I could remember but my mind keeps running back to
the window and those lights.
   This man is sceptical that his talents can help me recall
a dream. Realities are forever imprinted on the memory no
matter how dormant they seem. Dreams have no such substances,
so he thinks.
   Then how do I explain the scorched skin of my arms and face
if my vision had no reality? Thank goodness it was only dawn
light when my husband left for work this morning and he barely
commented on my `flush'. He wants me to see our doctor, which
at least gives me a believable excuse for missing work this
week, and I need all the time I can get before it is too late.
   The flames, they seem brighter about me now. The glare makes
sight colourless and the heat sears in slow motion.
   Hot. So hot.
   The window. It is black. The night must be cloudy outside
and the lights ... a town cresting a hill, a perfectly
rounded hill, topped by a tall chimney stack rising above the
buildings, above a sign. It seems back to front, the lacework
of the iron scaffolding seems to tower over the lettering. Two
words.
   Abruptly I am awake. He looks alarmed at my sweat sheen and
I know he regrets helping me so I smile reassuringly. At least,
I hope it is reassuring. My fingers fumble through my handbag
for pen and paper and whilst I can recall the last image, I put
down what I saw.

 Tuesday:  
The telephone directories are piled before me. I wish I
could work faster, but my fingers fumble with the thin paper.
Make haste slowly. I hear it in my head but I'm not wise enough
to heed it. The vision did not come last night and when I
finally succumbed to sleep, it was deep and dreamless.
My husband did not like to leave me this morning. It's almost
as if he can sense the tension in me, as if he knows something
is wrong and is looking for a physical reason for it. For all
his gentle anxiety, I have already dismissed him from my
thoughts and worries. He'll have to cope. I have a feeling this
place is far away - far enough to take me from home in my
search to reach there in time. I'll probably have to go today.
I didn't warn him, or prepare him.

