The visitors on the beach By Geoffrey Bewley  

SHANE felt the movement and turned over on the bed. Daylight was showing
around the shutters, under the palm-thatch roof. Wee Khoon was lying on
her side, watching him.
  "Hi there," he said, He touched her bare arm.
  "Hi," she said.
  Shane knew the still look on her face. He'd learned to tell it in the
last few months. He smiled at her.
  "Smile," he said. "Come on, smile, eh?"
  He widened his smile. She smiled back slightly.
  "What a smile," he said. "What a fantastic looking girl."
  He touched the bridge of her nose, and the freckles she was shy about.
Her mouth pulled down. "They're ugly," she said. 
  "No, they're cute," he said. This was a favourite old argument. 
  He held her to kiss her. Her smooth skin touched him without any sign
of excitement. He didn't like to urge her to react and after a long kiss
he let go.
  "You want to talk?" he said.
  Wee Khoon didn't move.
  "Talk about Australia?"
  "If you want to," she said.
  "Talk about it later," he said. "Talk about it when I get back."
  He opened the plank shutters. The sun wasn't up over the sea yet, but
the daylight made him blink. He pulled on his shorts and sandshoes and kissed
Wee Khoon again, and went down the rattly side stairs. Their room was above
the hut where tools, diving gear and motorcycles for hire were kept, standing
between the Lotus Bungalow cafe and the double row of A-frame palm-thatch
guest huts. He waved to the little Thai girls in the cafe setting the tables,
and he jogged down to the beach for his run.
  Every morning he jogged nearly a mile to the far rocks and back. This
morning his feet crunched on tiny white heart-urchin shells among the rubbish
on the tideline. He passed the other half dozen bungalow places on that
part of the island shore. Three stubby, high-bowed Thai trawlers were chugging
past in line like fighting ships, out to sea.
  He jogged past visitors from the other bungalows. One was doing yoga
exercises. A couple in sarongs were walking by the water, looking at the
dead urchins, looking for shells. He hadn't seen them before. It struck
him that now there were no visitors left who'd been there when he and Wee
Khoon had arrived, two months ago.
  Now Wee Khoon wanted to go too, but he still liked it there. They had
free food and lodging and now Mr Prem was paying them a hundred baht a day
for what they did, hiring out cycles and gear, helping tidy, looking after
the generator and interpreting for the visitors. He did the hiring and Wee
Khoon spoke Chinese, English and Thai. It was a good life for a while. They'd
have to leave in the end but it was good enough for a while yet.
  He kicked one of the rocks and started jogging back. The red sun was showing
now. More visitors were wading in the calm sea. He heard a motor on the
road beside the bungalows. An island taxi was dropping off more visitors
from the night boat. 
  Back at Lotus he showered and dressed. Two French couples had stopped
and Wee Khoon was showing them the cabins. She could understand their English
well enough. She joined him at breakfast after.
  "Do you need locks?" Shane said.
  "No, they had locks," she said. "No problem."
  Shane issued the padlocks for the cabin doors. Visitors had heard of thefts
at beaches and some brought their own locks. Visitors needing locks were
often happier taking them from a white than a Thai. That was part of his
value to Mr Prem.
  "What will you be doing today, anyway?" he said.
  "I've got to get food. I've got to go and buy things."
  "How about going up to the waterfall later on?"
  "Okay, sure. If nothing else happens."
  They were finishing their coffee when they heard another taxi on the track,
and when it stopped Mr Prem came in. He looked plump and clean and happy
in a yellow cotton shirt. Two young Thais in faded denims followed him.
He smiled at the kitchen girls and the people eating, and he smiled more
widely when he caught Shane's eye.
  He spoke cheerfully to Wee Khoon in Thai. "Mr Shane," he said. "How are
you today? I have something for you."
  Shane followed Mr Prem out to the taxi. A motorcycle lay on its side in
the back, between the seats. It was a new-looking Yamaha 125, with the front
wheel and forks bent, and gravel scrapes down one side.
  "See, I buy very cheap," Mr Prem said. "Because it is accident. But I
think, you can fix, okay?"
  "Well, probably if I can get the parts."
  "Ah, can get, can get. Okay, kay, kay."
  Mr Prem liked to see him working. He didn't mind much. He was happy to
tinker with things. Mr Prem sometimes spoke to Wee Khoon in Thai, suggesting
things for her to do. Shane didn't like to see Wee Khoon working harder
than he was.
  He started dismantling the Yamaha alongside the hut. He levered the bent
frame to loosen the nuts, and got the wheel out and the frame uncoupled.
The wheel and forks would have to be replaced. That took till late in the
morning. He stopped for a fruit drink with Wee Khoon in the cafe.
  She had a thick book with the cover missing. "What's that one about?"
he said.
  "It's called Thorn Birds. It's about Australia. Have you read it?"
  "No. I've heard about it. Where did you get it?"
  "I think one of the American girls left it. Is it a good book?"
  "I don't know. It's probably better than that last thing you were reading."
  An Australian girl leaving had given her a book called The Women's Room.
Shane had looked at it. It was the sort of thing he expected to find Australian
girls reading. He'd had enough of Australian girls. Thai girls now weren't
much either. The Thais weren't much, generally. Their national sport was
kicking each other in the face, and that told you everything you needed
to know.
  Now he knew the Chinese were the best people in Thailand. Wee Khoon's
family had a chemist's shop in Bangkok, and they'd sent her to study at
the Women's University in Manila. She was a terrific girl. He knew all about
Asian girls looking for white husbands. But he was happy with Wee Khoon
and if she wanted him, that suited him.
  Wee Khoon wrinkled her nose. "That book was crazy stuff," she said. "I
think this one is more true to life."
  "I'll read it and see, then."
  "And I was talking to the French people," Wee Khoon said. "I told them
what we were doing here. They thought it was good. Maybe they would like
to work for Mr Prem."
  "No, they don't speak good enough English," he said. "But what, you really
want to give up on this?"
  She didn't answer at once. "This is nice with the beach," she said. "But
I think it would be nice in other places we could go."
  "Nice in Australia?"
  "I think Australia would be nice. But there are other places as well where
we could go."
  Shane sucked his fruit juice and smiled at her.
  "Because I know you don't want to go to Australia yet," she said.
  "But anyway," he said, "what don't you like about it here?"
  "It's not too bad here. Only I think we've been here so long."
  "You don't like it with Mr Prem?"
  "No, he's no problem for me."
  "I mean, there isn't anything I don't know about, is there?"
  She glanced at the Thai girls behind. "No, he's just an ordinary Thai
man," she said. "There's nothing to worry about, I think."
  "Well, you know it's partly a matter of money, anyway."
  "But we do have enough to get to Australia, if we want to go," she said.
She was looking at him without any expression.
  "Okay, how about we put a limit on it?" he said. "How about we leave it
till my visa runs out, and then go down to Penang and just don't come back?
Then we could go over to Lake Toba and back, and then down the east coast
to Singapore, and then fly home from there."
  "If it's what you want," she said.
  "Well, it's an idea, anyway."
  Then Wee Khoon was looking round. There were quacking, laughing Thai voices
outside, and Mr Prem came in again. A middle-aged, square-faced Thai in
a smart tan safari suit came in behind him.
  "Hello, hello, hello," Mr Prem said, and he spoke to Wee Khoon in Thai.
She bent her head respectfully and said a few words.
  "He says people are coming," she said to Shane. "These are Thai people
he knows. So, I can't go out today. I have to be in the kitchen."
  "Oh. Well, we can go up there tomorrow, right?"
  "Tomorrow," Mr Prem said. "Tomorrow, okay."
  Shane told him about the cycle in pieces. "So, if we could get the parts,
we could probably get it going," he said.
  "So, you can fix," Mr Prem said, smiling. "Not worry. Okay, kay, kay."
  But he couldn't do any more with the cycle just then. He took flippers
and a mask and a handspear from the store under the hut, and walked down
the beach past the swimmers and sunbathers to the rock spit. The sand under
the warm water there dropped sharply just offshore, and then shelved very
gradually to about twenty feet a couple of hundred yards out.
  Out there he swam over a cluster of live heart urchins, thin-cased lumps
coated with short furry spines, using the few long whiskery spines on each
side like oars, dragging themselves across the bottom, leaving winding tracks
in the grey sand. He kicked in slowly toward the beach and the rocks, diving
every now and then just for the exercise. The only fish about were too tiny
to bother with.
  He dived closer to the rocks, and then he saw a shivering movement, the
fins of a bigger fish hovering over the sand near the limit of his vision.
He surfaced for a full breath, dived again and kicked toward it along the
bottom. It was a fat green wrasse, a good big one, a pound and a half, two
pounds, it had started swimming slowly toward the rocks, and he was closing
on it from the side. He could see its beaky mouth working. The rubber was
tight over his right hand, and he reached forward, aimed over the barbs
and let go, and the fat shiny fish jerked on the barbs and sank under the
shaft's weight.
  Shane kicked in to the shore and worked the fish off the barbs, and walked
back up the beach carrying it on a wire through its gills. It was about
a two-pounder. People on the sand, a couple of French girls in string bikini
bottoms, stopped him to look at it, and he was pleased to show them. It was
good to dive and kill something you could take back to eat. It was one of
the best things about the island beach.
  Back at Lotus most of the visitors had finished lunch, and were on the
sand again or resting at their cabins. But another taxi was parked outside,
and he saw people crowded around a table in the shade inside. Mr Prem was
there and he looked up and waved.
  "You, you, friend," he called. "My friend, Mr Shane."
  Shane waved. He was looking for Wee Khoon in the kitchen.
  "Come, you come, Mr Shane, come."
  Shane looked round properly. There were six Thais beside Mr Prem. One
was the man in the safari suit he'd seen earlier. 

