A clear conscience By Robert Dessaix  

LET THE SCREECHOWLS screech and the moralists snap and yap at my heels -
I am unmoved. I am not to blame.
  My innocence, however, is not the issue. My only reason for retelling
the tale is to establish the truth of what happened once and for all. My
aim, in a word, is lucidity, above all lucidity. As if by vapours from some
putrid swamp, the truth has become so clouded by fabrication and false report
that the facts of the case have all but disappeared from view.
  Our first meeting is etched clearly in my memory. It was at brunch at the 
Foleys, one Sunday in April. Brunch was served on a green tray in the courtyard,
green being more a summer luncheon colour, I should have thought, but the
Foleys have never been sticklers for detail. The warm, crusty croissants were 
a comfort, the coffee a mild Colombian roast, and high up above in the crown 
of the umbrella tree there were honeybirds creating havoc. The womenfolk were 
still pottering in the kitchen, I remember, and Roy Foley was being faintly 
disagreeable, sniffing around the main point of the conversation (my script), 
hesitating to lunge. "Yes, I like it, Roger, I like it very much," he 
kept saying, toying with the Swiss marmalade with
those long, unaccountably tanned fingers of his. "Yes, I do like it, Roger,
and God knows I get very little I do like coming across my desk these days."
He really talks like that - "coming across my desk". "But I'm wondering
about the audience appeal side of it ..." Here he trailed off. And at that
very instant she wandered out through the french doors into the courtyard.
  She headed towards us with the air of a child looking for a lost ball,
not exactly disregarding us, but occupied with something else. In a yellow
tracksuit. Of course, the Russians and Germans have written a lot of
high-sounding rubbish about "love at first sight" (so-called), describing
in tedious, overblown detail how it strikes its victims like a cobra, like
cholera or a bolt of lightning. Well, no aurora borealis lit up the sky
for me, I assure you, and indeed I find that whole nineteenth century
dramatisation of a simple first frisson morbid and totally unconvincing.
The yellow struck me, I admit, and the cold, sad, cat's eyes, but that's
all.
  "Ah, Louise, Louise, this is Roger, a friend of ours - or perhaps you
met last - er - Saturday, was it?" Roy was dithering. Louise circled slowly
and sat down. Roy rambled on a bit, trying to light on a suitable topic
for three people who didn't care about each other to exchange views on.
He failed. Louise, I knew, was his sister-in-law. Our wives bustled out
with more coffee, pumpernickel and cheese and swept Louise up in a gust
of sisterly good humour. Borne aloft briefly on their bonhommie, she smiled
and chatted for a few moments and then seemed to sink again, eddying downwards
in a slow spiral of despondency.
  I was beginning to be intrigued. Just pinpricks of quickened interest,
mind you, nothing of consequence. I drew her out. She wrote. Oh? What? Plays.
Oh, really? Anything I'd have seen? Probably not. Try me. And so on. Her
tense stillness was engaging. Did it suggest she was disconcertingly close
or immeasurably far away? My wife, meanwhile, was darting in and out of
the conversation like a wasp - "pass the cheese", "isn't it hot?", "and
where are you living?" (Not "do you live", I noticed.) Like all rudderless
women my wife is forever getting her bearings. Despite her peevish forays,
however, Louise and I forged a delicate link. When the others wandered off
to the far end of the courtyard to admire Roy's bromiliads, I caught her
eye across the table strewn with coffee-cups and croissant flakes and suggested
we meet again before too long and talk about her latest script - after all,
I was an old hand. She wasn't averse to the idea and even smiled, I thought,
perhaps a little kittenishly. As we drove home, I was aware of a pleasant
yellowish blur at the edges of my mind.                               
                                

  On reading my description of our first meeting, I must say, in the interests
of absolute lucidity, that the description is, in certain details, somewhat
impressionistic. In fact, to be absolutely candid, it's largely nonsense.
And, again, I mainly blame the Germans and Russians: they've made it quite
impossible for us to grasp the thing in itself any more, stripped of all
the verbal dross and metaphysical flimflam. I mean, "Colombian roast", "first
frisson", "slow spiral of despondency" - God alone knows where I dredged
all that up from. Not that the versions concocted by my wife, or Roy's,
bear any closer relation to the truth - far from it. According to one of
my wife's more hysterical accounts, for instance, I set the whole thing
up expressly to humiliate her in front of her friends and it was nothing
but a cynical, ruthless attempt to murder our marriage, while Roy's wife,
not to be upstaged, claimed for months that Roy had engineered the whole
thing to humiliate her. Why would he bother? Women are born spinners of
tales, as a rule with themselves as the central character. 
  No, that's all a lot of hogwash and the unadorned facts are these:
technically, I first met Louise quite by chance, improbably as it may sound,
at an ABC staff party in the company of a poet wearing a beard and a Hawaiian
shirt, and I found her attractive and not, I thought at the time, disinclined
to pursue the dialogue we had established. So I asked Roy Foley, who was
hovering, to invite us both to lunch some time. So he did. And quite frankly,
I was captivated. There is nothing more seductive than utter vulnerability
sprinkled with the grit of self-respect. Claws concealed by silky paws.
  We did meet again, of course, after the Foleys' lunch and discussed her
play over Viennese cakes and smoky tea in a smart, colour-coordinated cafe
with bland pastel prints on the walls, near Taylor Square. What drew me
on? I think her restrained playfulness, the grace and tenderness of the
pale hands reaching across the table to fondle petals, napkins, even the
fragile handle of my teacup, together with the feline watchfulness of her
black-edged eyes, as hard, and soft, as amber beads. I tracked her through
the maze of her playscript, pruning here and nurturing there, and when we
emerged at the other end, relaxed, relieved and stimulated, I thought of
home, my wife, my blinkered Trotskyite daughter and my son, his mind askew
with tarot cards and natural living, and knew, with a quiver of certainty
and a sudden dry stickiness on the roof of my mouth, that I was about to
commit adultery.
  I was not "in love". I emphasise this point because befuddling notions
such as this have needlessly confused the issue all along. At night, when
the children were out at their futile meetings about solidarity with Bolivian
miners and herbal cures for stomach cancer, my wife would forever be whining
at me: "Are you in love with someone else? You're in love with someone else."
How tiresome it was and ultimately meaningless. What is it supposed to mean,
this phrase "in love"? What specific sensations does it refer to in the
real world, if any, and, if any, why not name them?
  I have been open and frank about my attitude to these questions since
adolescence. I have consistently maintained that concepts such as
`commitment', `responsibility' and `fidelity' are not so much outmoded
as meaningless, and meaningless in the most direct sense: these words do
not refer to anything identifiable in the real world. What is identifiable
is that I entered into a contract of cohabitation and mutual consideration
with my wife. Why such a contract should exclude emotional involvement and
occasional copulation with other persons has never been clear to me and
I have never, or almost never, subscribed to that view of it. However, as
I explained to Louise right at the start, or as near the start as practicable,
the validity of the contract itself was always permanent as far as I was
concerned. My wife is a mean-spirited, snappish creature, and my children
are bizarre and in the thrall of ideologies which are stultifying and alien
to me, yet on the whole the arrangement works well enough. I see no reason
to terminate it. But it includes, as far as I am concerned, the possibility
of my indulging myself emotionally and diverting myself sexually with other
people from time to time. I'm not talking about menages a trois, swinging
couples or asking my wife to entertain my mistress at morning tea or any
of that modern claptrap. I don't claim to be in the avant-garde, I merely
claim to be civilised. I had thought Louise understood that from the outset.
  The winter drew us together. There were picnics in Centennial Park,
surrounded by mallee-hens, Italian children and mohair rugs; there were
dinners at cosy French restaurants and takeaway Chinese on Sundays; we even
hired a car once and drove down to Gerringong to sit on the huge white sweep
of beach, high up where the tussock-grass starts, and watch the milky green
surf batter the sand; and there were evenings at home in her tiny lamp-lit
flat, eating curry with a fork and discussing her play, which by then was
in production and not going smoothly. I noticed, naturally, the growing
insistence that we arrange our next meeting for a specific place and time,
I noted, too, the unobtrusive ways she wove the fringes of our separate
lives together, and couldn't help but be struck by the little surge of
excitement that always came over her when we met. But I always thought she
understood my terms.
  Looking back, I think perhaps Louise mistook the trappings of passion
for passion itself. She misread my responses. The simple fact is that she
invited a sort of gentle savagery on my part, and enjoyed it, and was so
abundantly easy to pleasure. Certain lips may purse with distaste at such
intimate details, but I must record for the sake of complete lucidity that
when she made love to me, eyes closed, awash with pleasure, mewing, arching
and scratching, I found it, for banal chemical reasons, infinitely arousing.
It inflamed me, engorged me. But it wasn't passion. (I honestly believe,
with hindsight, that I've only felt real passion twice: once for my wife,
when we were young and it just welled up inside me, spontaneously like
hunger or nausea, because everything about her - her legs sheathed in 
stockings, her pale fingers, her baby-talk, her rhythmic walk, the way she
put spectacles on to read a book, her yawns, her shoulder-blades, everything,
everything, everything was utterly beautiful; the second time it was for a 
waiter in a spaghetti-house near Taylor Square, it lasted three weeks and was 
a total mystery to both of us. It was not passion I felt for Louise.)
  At some level, it now transpires, Louise and I were writing our lives
into vastly different scripts. Oddly enough, it was Roy who first alerted
me to it, in his heavy-footed way. We'd met entirely by chance at The Stag
near Taylor Square (and not, as Roy would later have it, in the foyer of
the Academy Cinema - Roy is too precious by half about his reputation, there
is nothing remotely louche about The Stag). I'd looked to one side after
ordering a drink, picking out faces and profiles in the reddish gloom, and
my eyes had connected with Roy's. There he was, one elbow on the bar in
the classic pose. He'd been grinning at me (but to himself) for some minutes,
it would seem.

