"Again" By Adela Rogers McKenzie-Cameron  

  SHE liked her new bathers. They were bottle-green stretchy stuff with
silver leaves and flowers in a front panel.
  They fitted into her body, boys looked, she aware but unaware.
  She was sixteen and accustomed to being on her own; in the scrub or
investigating the wind-swept wild beaches of her home town. Now, as she
sat on the city beach with people, she behaved as she did at home; not really
aware of the reason for the behaviour of other girls.
  His parents sat on a checkered rug and invited her to share their picnic.
They were warm people and she enjoyed their company.
  "Have another sandwich, sit on the rug. It's only an old one, don't worry
about your wet togs," his mother said.
  She worked as junior office girl in the bakery where `his' father worked
as a baker; a heavy lumbering man in his movements, a sparkle in his eyes,
gentle as his wife, and full of humour. She wanted to hug them, be with
them like a daughter, her own father was in a convalescent hospital in
Melbourne. 
  "Come on girlie eat up, gotta keep in shape with all that tea-making you
have to do," said his father. 
  The lunch room at work was at the rear of the building, one of her jobs
was to prepare tea for the office staff. She had to walk through the work
area of the bakery to carry out this task, many eyes followed her as she
walked to and fro with the trolley. The stuffy head accountant often came
mincing along, moving in on the small gathering at the wire door.
  "Have a cuppa dear," his mum said, passing her a steaming mug from the
thermos.
  She finished her tea and thanked them. He said, "I'll see you tomorrow
at the bus."
  She left to rejoin her cousin, it was time they got their bikes and headed
home from swimming training.
  The bus was for the "swim through" Port Wakefield, she would be sitting
with him, her "boyfriend" as she had come to accept him but nothing had
ever been said in this regard, she only knew that something had changed
in her.
  His eyes sparkled like his Dad's, he was strong from bike training, she
liked going to the velodrome and feeling the thrill of his popularity.
  On the way home from the "swim through" it was the usual fumbling session
from him and the usual pushing away from her private places from her, she
wanted him, but knew nothing of how to have him.
  She started quietly singing the latest pop song, "Again." The couple sitting
in front of them heard her and turned around, "Sing it for us," said the
young man. She did, and enjoyed their pleasure, she loved singing but had
never had an audience before.
  "I'm moving next week to stay with Rene and her family.".
  "Let's go to the Piccadilly Saturday then, okay? I'll see you out the
front," he said.
  She wanted to move. The cousins to whom her mum had entrusted her were
not well known to her. They restricted her movements and she didn't understand
their concern if she was late home.
  The father was a Spaniard, she loved the way he pottered around his garden,
filled with bush, standard and climbing roses; or in his dark little garden
shed, singing Spanish songs as he bottled apricot brandy from his bubbling
still.
  The Mum, her Dad's Welsh cousin, was five feet nil, rotund, rosy cheeked,
and seemed totally unaware of how she had conceived her children.
  She cooked bacon, duck eggs and tomato, for breakfast every morning; gave
her husband Kraft cheese sandwiches every day as he set off for work at
the Islington workshops for forty years, same bike too.
  The family knew what was for tea according to the day of the week. She
always washed on Mondays, ironed Tuesdays, shopped Wednesdays, and cleaned
on Thursday etc.
  The adventures of independence and the city beckoned her. Rene worked
in the office. She was older, about twenty-five, and had befriended her.
  "It's costing you a fortune for fares. Mum says it's okay for you to board
with us if you like".
  They were a betting-on-horses type family. Saturdays were full of race
results, footy, cricket, bets, prices and ifs. Rene had two brothers. One
was older than she was: tall dark and handsome; always in a hurry, with
a tall dark and handsome girlfriend, the parson's daughter.
  The other was a late comer of about ten, surly, spoilt, and a proper little
prune.
  As she packed her few belongings she promised her father's cousin she
would be all right, that she would visit them. The little woman fussed,
"I don't know about this I said we would take care of you," becoming more
red in the face and short of breath as she helped, her hubby saying, "Oh
dashy," in the background.
  She breathed a sigh of relief and wanted to run as she headed for the
tram stop. She needed to be with her mate more often and not have to watch
the clock, or to have her cousin in three times removed always in tow. She
looked forward to Saturday night at the Piccadilly.
  They had been keeping company for about six months, usually with the swimming
club kids or the bike track crowd, rarely alone except petting sessions
in shop doorways while they waited for the last tram after dances or the
pictures. It was like battling with an octopus. He never gave her time to
feel her own feelings; she was too busy struggling. But when he kissed her
it was different, then her feelings almost overwhelmed her. It made her
forget, "If you let a boy kiss you, you will get pregnant." The last kiss
usually caused her to run for the tram going the opposite way to his.
  She settled into her new place of residence well. She rarely had trouble
fitting in with people. She tried to be helpful and kept herself clean and
her area tidy, the way she liked things.
  She saved her spare money after board and personal items. When she had
enough she flew to Melbourne to stay at Mount Martha hospital on long weekends,
Easter etc. where she joined in the activities of disabled and rehabilitating
patients. She became fond of eight ball during the period, and her father
responded to the pleasure given and taken.
  "Come on the picture is starting," he said as he approached her on the
corner in front of the theatre.
  As soon as the lights went out his hand pushed up under her dress. She
pushed it away and held it to keep it in place, but the thought of his kisses
later made her stomach contract and feel warm.
  The fumbling and "dont's" went on throughout the film and her heart thumped
in anticipation of him walking her home, no cousin, no tram, no running.
  The street was lined with houses, and the only place they could be alone
and unseen was behind the old stone church, where he now led her. He pushed
her against the wall behind one of the buttresses and started kissing her.
"Come on, love, it won't hurt, just once," he said. He was hot to touch
and her stomach was giving her problems, it felt hot too.
  His kisses and where he was putting his hands started affecting her knees,
they wanted to buckle. "Come on, just one push," he said in her ear, his
face so hot. They were perspiring though the night was cool.
  All she could do was feel, she couldn't speak, she couldn't understand
her fear, she felt as though her home beach waves were smashing into her
body as she loved them to do, but the water was hot instead of the bracing
cold with which she felt at one. Then she felt through the hair of her vagina
something hotter as he pushed against her, it was hard and forced her legs
apart. The next moment something hotter ran down her legs. He released her
and she looked down. She had been holding her dress up, and in the moonlight
she could see blood coursing down at his white underpants, dark stained,
and saying "Christ" over and over again.
  He backed away, adjusting his clothes, then bent and took her feet out
of her panties and tried to wipe her legs, mumbling things like, "Are you
alright?" and "Christ" again.
  Her jelly legs ran her home. She looked through the kitchen window, saw
Rene, and tapped on the window. Rene looked up. She beckoned her and Rene
saw her and grabbed her arm and dragged her into the verandah bathroom.
  "What was it like?" she said, running the tap and rinsing diluted blood
down the washbasin. "My Ron wants me to do it, but I don't want to until
after the wedding." Rene prattled on while she just leaned against the wall,
weak, head spinning and thinking, gradually more clearly, as Rene chatted
and questioned without waiting for answers.
  "Now, maybe," she said in her head, "Now I'm his girl."
  A few weeks later her place of work was having its annual ball. She laybyed
a new dress: a silk type fabric, cream with sprays of autumn-toned flowers
and leaves, puffed short sleeves, a wide waist band, a low round neck line
and a full circular skirt draped to the floor. She loved it, and was full
of expectation as the night of the dance came around.
  She knew he would be there and was now certain that he would take her
home.
  She took care of her bathing and grooming, Rene talking as usual about
her Ron this and her Ron that and maybe they could have supper together,
the four of them. They put their coats on and set out. The dance hall was
in the city so they took the tram. She was glad she didn't have to talk
much because her thoughts were so busy with romantic images of movie type
love scenes full of heroes: Tarzan, John Garfield, Robert Taylor, Clark
Gable. She felt like Rita Hayworth and Jane Russell all rolled into one.
  They walked into the hall. Ron was there, so that kept Rene busy. She
looked everywhere for her man but he wasn't there. It was early, so she
sat trying to appear nonchalent. The master of ceremonies announced the
first dance and a dozen couples got up.
  The dance finished and the room filled with the hum of voices and the
excitement of the night began to clutch her stomach, she was glad she was
sitting down because the jelly feeling in her knees was starting again,
no wonder there was so much written, said, and filmed about love. It's such
a wonderful thing, as rich as her scrub and her beach: a total wonder.
  A few dances had come and gone, many more people arrived, they had been
there about an hour and he still hadn't come.
  Her palms were sweating and she sat very straight in her seat. The seats
were arranged in a single row against the wall of the hall.
  "I wonder where he's got to," said Rene for the umpteenth time, behind
her hand slightly open towards her. "Even if he missed a tram he should
be here by now."
  The next dance started, Rene and Ron swirled off into the now chattering,
laughing, having-a-good-time crowd. Then she saw him at the double doors,
her heart thumped, she felt her face go instantly hot, she stood so that
he would see where she was, but a pretty girl with a long dress and black
curly hair down about her creamy shoulders stood beside him with her arm
linked in his. 
  She sat. Fortunately the seat was in the right place. Rene and Ron came
back and sat next to her.

