A vision in suburbia By Craig McGregor  

  "I just had a vision," he said.
  "What of?"
  "A large space, a room, with sunlight pouring down like treacle and seagrass
all over the floor."
  "Home?"
  "We haven't found it yet."
  She liked warehouses, old factories, lofts, big garages with pillars propping
the ceiling up. No divisions. Space. Soot-greyed windows. They used to be
all over the inner city but the high rises and expressways had razed most
of them.
  "Do you really think we can live like that?" he said.
  "We can try."
  "Bloody cold. Freeze your balls off in winter."
  "Temperate climate, so they say."
  "I was thinking more about - you know, withdrawing. Keeping out of the
system. The urban ghetto."
  "Whatever happened to commitment?" she said.
  "I sometimes think that the primary commitment," he said, "is disengagement
from that which corrupts you."
  Terrace houses fronted the street. They were called bald-faced terraces:
no garden, no front yard, doors opening straight onto the footpath. Narrow
balconies jutted overhead. Plane trees, council brush box. Tar and dogshit
sealed the wounds in the cracked concrete. Trayback lorries and vans shunted
past, heading for the Italian greengrocers and sandwich shops and discount
stores along the main street.
  "I've always liked the idea of getting by on the minimum," he said.
  "You could have fooled me."
  "Reckon we could all live in one room?"
  "With the kids? No. They need space for themselves."
  "So do we."
  "We've had it, they haven't. It's their turn."
  "You know what I like about you?" he said. "You're so damned fair."
  She looked at him quickly. "Sometimes."
  "I don't mind the idea of you sleeping with someone else, its the visualising
I can't stand."
  "Like?"
  "Oh ... all the things you do with me."
  Camellias were dropping in the garden. The edges of their petals were
brown; rottenness sullied their pink and white. Francoise sat on the opposite
bench, both hands cupped around her coffee, her expression changing a thousand
times a minute as she talked about men, the kids, massage, diets, perfidy,
France, the past, bus timetables, shithouse Labor politicians, the sales,
pets, and men. She always looked at her best when she was animated.
  He liked Francoise, but he wouldn't let her massage him. 
  The phone rang. It was Johnston. He wanted the job done by the end of
the week.
  Next morning it was raining. Car tyres sounded like the wakes of power
boats. He ran his hand down her bum but got no response. From himself. He
had to work. The kids went to school. The rain hung like a sump oil cloth
over the harbour. She caught the bus by the depot. The TV set wavered,
soundless. He switched it off. Toast crusts on the kitchen sink. A single
room? We need all the support we can get. He rang Johnston. Upstairs the
drawing board waited.
  Francoise rang. Another fight. No, his wife was out. No, she couldn't
come over. In the garden the camellias turned to a squashy pulp.
  The cars turned their lights on early. He was lying on the floor, sickness
in his throat. There were screams on the TV. Soap opera screams. Worse than
the real ones. Why were there screams anywhere?
  When she came home she had been drinking. She was lighthearted, effusive.
He went into the bathroom and tried to calm down. The mirror was peeling.
The floor was wet. They couldn't afford to do it up.
  "You're late," he said.

  "There was a committee meeting," she said. "It went on and on. Couldn't
stop old Giovanni speaking. We're going to have to get a new chairman."
  It sounded too circumstantial
  "Then I went for a drink," she said.
  "Who with?"
  "Don't be so paranoid. Christine, and that nice young bloke from child
care. Andrew. The one you don't like."
  "Fuckin' cockswain," he said. "Francoise rang."
  "What she want?"
  "I think she wants my body."

  She came over to him and kissed him on the ear. Her breath smelt of gin.
"She can have it," she said, "whenever you like."
  "Are you trying to arrange a swap?" he said.
  "Not me."
  "They've had another fight."
  "What about this time?"
  "I don't know. I didn't ask. I'm tired of being Mr Bleeding Heart."
  "I'll ring her." She paused. "Tomorrow."
  He went to the stereo and put on a Jelly Roll Morton record. The raucous,
ginmill, goodtimey music filled the living room. It would sound even better
in a warehouse. Did the music really crystallize the age, or was it simply
the stage the music had reached in the evolutionary art cycle? Unread
newspapers spilled out of the magazine rack. There was a Petty cartoon on
the wall. He was surrounded by familiar icons to comfort him.
  So why wasn't he comforted?
  The drawing board looked hostile. He checked on the kids instead. They
were asleep. In the First World War sixty thousand Australians were killed,
all volunteers. They found themselves in the blood-and-mud trenches of
Passchendale; some came back from their first artillery barrage crying for
their mothers, senseless. Deserters were shot. The others went over the
top with their guts full of rum. They died of shrapnel, gangrene, gas. Billy
Hughes, the Little Digger, Labor ratfink, called for conscription. One of
the conscripts could have been his son.
  Andrew rang. No, she wasn't there. No, he couldn't leave a message.
  He could get fucked.
  "Who was that?"
  "Johnston," he lied.

  If a current Labor PM tried to introduce conscription he would kill him.
  Johnston would have to help. Johnston had been to Vietnam ... as a cameraman.
A blast of dope and a close-up of what Uncle Sam had done to an Asian race
had turned him into a revolutionary. Now he wanted a poster for his film.
The poster wasn't working. He wasn't working.
  He was trying.
  Thursday was payday. Every second Thursday. This was the first Thursday.
It always seemed to be the first Thursday.
  He didn't have a payday but she did.
  The Playboy centrefolds had faded into the garage walls, along with the
Yokohama calendars, the Mirror pin-ups, the greasy New Year greeting cards.
He left the car for a grease and oil change, cheered by the ambience of
peeling red-painted hydraulic jacks, buckets of sump oil, wheeled backrests,
blackened spanner boxes. Continuity. Stable. There must be something good
about being a postman, too. You do it, and that's it.
  "Sugar, please," said Nina, who was Francoise's friend.
  It was still raining, on and off. There had been black rainwater across
the concrete garage floor. Nina sat with her legs crossed.
  "What were you doing in Love Art?" she said.
  "Porno films turn me on. All those women ... ladies ... they seem so
unselfconscious. I like 'em."
  "Anyone can do that."
  "Is that a proposition?"
  "Yes." She smiled with her goldcapped teeth. "No." She closed her mouth.
"How is it with your wife?"
  "She's good. As usual. It's me who falls apart. Climacteric. Male ...
you've heard of it?"
  She started a catalogue. "Cancer. The Perfect Rooster. Past the year of
the Rat. Show me your irises ..."
  "That's shit," he said. "It was good to run into you. I have to go."
  A drawing board is a loathsome thing.
  Tow trucks were pulled off the side of the freeway. Their cabin lights
went round and round. A car was on its side. As the traffic rushed past cars
flicked their lights on, off, on, off. A man was walking a clutch of greyhounds
along the overhead footbridge. They had leather muzzles except for a grey
one which had a muzzle of steel.
  "We were so close a few days ago," he said, "we had nowhere to go but
apart." 
  They had been arguing, again. About the past. You don't know where you're
going till you know where you've been.
Maybe they didn't argue about the future because they didn't have one together.
  That was wrong.
  It was more likely that no-one, anywhere, had any future once the timeclock
ran out. On the women's toilet wall: NUCLEAR WHOLLY-CAUST BY GREED. Under
which some Christian or maybe some hills-and-dope alternate had scrawled:
FEAR ONLY THYSELF.
  They had been close. They had made love in the afternoon in the sun on
the seagrass matting with dust in their noses and the lorrikeets whistling
and shrieking as they fed on the bottlebrushes, and then again that night
though she would rather have gone to sleep. "I'm replete but my body's greedy,"
he said lightly. Despite herself she seemed stirred by his sheer physical
passion and next morning when she woke up, she felt both sore and fulfilled.
So she said.
  It lasted two or three days and then they started arguing. The past stuck
in their throats. It was inescapable.
  If it had been with Francoise it might have been all right. Francoise
was a friend. She was no threat.
  While on a car trip from the north coast to Sydney Johnston had given
a lift to his mate's wife. It had taken two days. The situation overwhelmed
them, the adventure of it. Johnston decided to leave home. By the time they
got over the Harbour Bridge he had decided not to. Nobody cried. The hurt
of it broke them all up, all the same.
  He rang Johnston again. He needed another week. Johnston swore. It was
a bad line because of the electrical storm over the North Shore.
  He put the garbage bins in the back lane, locked the dogs in the outside
toilet, made a hot Horlicks for his wife, set the alarm for 5 a.m., pulled
the phone out of the corridor wall.
  In bed she insisted on reading. When she turned the light out he was half
asleep. She put her hand on his cock.
  "Doesn't seem very interested," she said.
  "Give me time to wake up."
  He pulled her over and above him. "I don't know that I should do this,"
he said. "It could seem like ... imposing my will."
  "I'm the one on top!"
  Before he went inside her he hesitated again. "This could appear like
a violation," he said, "of your integrity."
  "What's integrity?" she said.
  "We could always go to sleep."
  "Shut up."

  He came first and felt guilty. She rolled off him and lay without speaking
with her back against him.
  "I don't like using you," he said at last. "It makes me feel bad. I've
read too many books. I'm too selfconscious. It used to be natural, I used
to be able to rely on my instinct. Now I worry about it, I worry if I am
impinging upon your independence, I worry if our relationship is unfair,
I worry if I can satisfy you sexually, I worry if you are fulfilled ..."
  The cars sluiced past on the roadway. A mild night wind, the sort that
drifts past in the wake of a thunderstorm, shook their bamboo blind. A blurred
stereo was playing in one of the terraces down the street.
  "I am trying to get to sleep," she said.
  He lay on his back with his hands behind his head. The sperm on his belly
got cold. The disturbed breathing of one of the children came through the
bedroom door.
  Francoise.
  Nina.
  Johnston.
  Andrew. His wife. Him.
  He lay there for a long time. Something scrabbled across the roof.
  A taxi, garbled radio calls, a car door.
  At this time, wrote Mailer, we lose the best of our kind.
  As he turned over she touched him, in her sleep, with her hand. Contact.
Of a kind.

 READING SHORT STORIES By Craig McGregor  

Music wound through their lives like the gold lame thread in her dressiest
going-out evening top. They had music on the trannie on top of the fridge
in the kitchen which played Triple J and news breaks and sometimes, when
the packaged media input got too great, a Michael Franks tape.

