By Robert English 30:  Tax avoidance and a Big Mac  

    The Premier was sitting out on his back patio watching the rain.  It
hadn't been a particularly good week for him, but then again, not many were.
    Frank had taken the car shortly after six.  Before he'd left, the Premier
had told him that he was a dead man.  Frank had said that he doubted that.
The Premier then said that he had no option but to destroy him.  Frank had
just smiled and said quietly:  "We'll see."
    The next day he had to fly to Canberra.  He wondered whether Daphne
would still go after all that had happened.  He hoped not.  He wanted peace.
He wanted a rest.  He wanted strength to face what he knew was going to
be the most difficult week of his career.  And he knew that the Prime Minister
was going to jump all over him for weekend sport merely on the basis that
his popularity in the latest poll had dropped to 1.8 percent.  He picked
up his glass of sherry and sighed.  He wondered how long dinner would be.
He was hungry and his wife had been on the phone for almost an hour.  He
knew that she was talking to that ratbag Everton-Phillip, whom she considered
to be the best accountant/lawyer in the country.  He knew that he was telling
her that his Trust Deed was nothing more than a legal fiction and that the
situation would be very grave indeed once he disclosed its fraud to the
tax people and that she needn't worry any more because he could stitch up
the Premier with just one phone call, and his beloved Patricia would end
up getting everything if she left it all up to him.  He knew this because
he'd had his own phone tapped, here at the house, and was thus cognizant
of their scheming which had been going on for almost a year.  He also played
squash with Everton-Phillip's senior partner who fortunately owed him a
few favours because of some liquidation misdemeanours he'd been involved
in and which remained uninvestigated, and in return he had provided the
Premier with a copy of the young fool's file and all his diary notes.  And
to top all this off, that ratbag friend of hers, Penelope Thrush, who'd
had a secret crush on him since their teens, still thought that she could
ingratiate herself by giving him a blow by blow description of their
conversation at dinner earlier in the week, whereby he was brought right
up to date on George's plans and ambitions.
    Even without this latest information he had long ago signed fresh trust
documents, all above board, and activated them into his latest tax situation
with the intent of pleading ignorance of the other scheme and perhaps
suggesting that his wife, who was a co-beneficiary, had gone her own way
on the advice of a young and ambitious crook who saw his opportunity to
gain her favours by manipulating his professional skills in a most unethical
way.  He felt that George, once the chips were down, would relinquish all
her financial demands rather than face the ignominy of a criminal
investigation, flimsy as the evidence might well be.
    When she finally appeared and lied about who'd been on the phone, he
mentioned that they might think about dinner and George suggested he could
perhaps go out and get himself a Big Mac, and he felt that this was not
right and proper treatment for the top man in the State, and duly pointed
this out, and she merely asked would he mind getting her one too, and he
got angry and mentioned her fetish for whips, leather and domination and
her unrequited love for Margaret Thatcher and why hadn't she told him all
this before they were married, and she pointed out that this was none of
his business, and he told her that he was considering submitting a complete
file on her secret activity to the Chief Walloper of the Vice Squad, and
she picked up the sherry bottle and smacked him in the face with it, and
as he fell off the chair, the last thought he had before losing consciousness,
was that he was going to have one helluve black eye when he met up with
the Prime Minister the following morning.

                    
 31: The Speech Writer  

    Dennis Penwick was a closet homosexual.  He was also the speech writer
for the Leader of the Opposition who had given him the task of preparing
a speech which the L.O. knew he'd have to make during question time after
the Government snipers had raised the question of his alleged presence at
the Touch of Arse.  The L.O. had also asked him to pepper it with as many
cliches as possible, as these always went over well with the less perceptive
readers of the afternoon tabloids.  Thus on this particular Friday night,
Dennis was dutifully listing cliches from a notebook containing more
than 200 that could be adapted to almost any occasion.
    His first three were:
         Smear and innuendo A plethora of lies Scurrilous attack  
These could easily be slotted into any opening harangue.  So often had
they been used by almost everybody, that they had little more than cosmetic
effect.  However, they were necessary to give the impression that a straight
bat was being used by a determined opener.
    Dennis selected three more:
         A Pandora's box As hard as a honeymooner's prick Out of all proportion  
He looked at his second selection and wondered why he'd included it
there.  It was for use more at stag parties or Rotarian lunches.  He scratched
it out feeling that its inclusion was nothing more than a Freudian slip.
         Malicious gossip Strenuously denied Put in its right perspective  
All these cliches would be a sound foundation for the opening defence.
 Now he felt he must move on to the attack:
         Will not tolerate Watch them run for cover Like rats deserting a sinking ship  
Good solid stuff.  But how about a few whizz-bangers for a headline?
         Depraved and sordid minds Sewer rat tactics Nothing above the navel  
And for a big finale:
         Jackboot tactics The end of democracy  
I feel sorry for the lot of you if that's all you can come up with.
    Dennis slapped the book shut.  Having completed the artery system of
the speech, he would wait until the next day before building up the flesh
and bones around it.  His mother called from the kitchen asking if he'd
like some cocoa before bed.  He shouted back that he wasn't going to bed 
but was going out.
    She was at the door in seconds.  "Where to?" she demanded.  Although
her son was 42 years old, she never failed to get anxious when he'd announced
that he was going out at night.
    None of your business, you old fat-whacked hag, he'd wanted to say.
Instead he said: "Oh, just down to Saul's place to play some records and
watch a bit of T.V..."
    "He's gay," his mother shouted.
    Dennis straightened up and faced her, his nostrils flaring.
    "It's alright for you to stand there, with complete household immunity,
and cast those aspersions at my friends ... but everybody knows that this
is just smear and innuendo and ..."
    "He's a Craven A!" his mother interrupted.
    "You just can't help yourself can you, with your plethora of pandora's
boxes ..."
    "What on earth are you talking about, Dennis?"
    "... and your sewer-level rat-like navels, like a sea-green incorruptible
with below-the-belt attacks of scurril and gossipy maliciousness..."
    "Dennis, are you practising your speeches again?"
    "... And it will bring you down, you fag-hater... you honeymooner's
prick..."
    "Dennis!"  His mother was pale.
    "... And if that's all you can come up with ... well my God, I feel
sorry for the likes of you ..."
    He pushed past her, fuming with rage, and made for the front door. 
She turned, now even paler, and jumped as he slammed it hard.  "Dennis!"
But he was gone into the night.

          
 32: Death at the Cross  

    It was after midnight on a cool autumn evening.  There was an air of
expectancy amongst the surging crowd at the Cross because it was already
the weekend.  Armies of drunken men and women sauntered, walked, ran, pushed
and shoved, lifting wallets, vomiting in garbage bins, buying and selling
drugs, stopping to look, to buy, to chat up, to fall in love for a couple
of hours, and generally to have a good time.  The bars were still open and
would be for another five hours.  Plenty of time to get some last minute
action, and if you didn't, you could punch someone up or jump on a car bonnet
or, as last resort, rip a couple of seats out of the train on the way home.
    The Chief Secretary and his friend the Minister for Planning and
Environment were enjoying pancakes and coffee at their favourite late-night
restaurant, one flight up overlooking Darlinghurst Road.  They had been
to the Opera.
    "I still think there's a big argument for sub-titles," George Miller
said.
    "Do you really, George?"  The Minister was applying more lemon and honey
to his already overloaded pancake.  "Don't you think that would lessen the
authenticity a trifle?"
    They both looked down and across the street where three leather-coated
youths were bashing a street-walker.  Apparently there was some dispute
about the price.
    "What's the use of listening to a mob of bastards sing their little
hearts out for a couple of hours and you don't even know what they're saying?"
    The unfortunate prostitute fell to the ground.  One of the youths stomped
her face with his motorcycle boot.
    "You're supposed to know the story-line, George.  And if you don't,
there's a short resume in the programme..."  He slipped the rolled pancake
into his mouth and washed it down with a generous mouthful of port.
    "Well, tomorrow night, me and a few of the boys are going to the demolition
derby at the Showground ... and you sure don't need subtitles there, eh?"
    The Minister winced.  Why did he put up with this philistine?  The Chief
Secretary, who didn't miss much, saw the Minister wince out of the corner
of his eye.  Why did he put up with this pretentious shit?
    They both turned towards the commotion at the top of Darlinghurst Road.
A car had been set on fire and a crowd was gathering.
    "And what's on your plate at the moment, George?"  The Minister wasn't
really interested, but he desperately wanted to change the subject.
    "Well, as you know, I'm chairing the drug committee ... we wind up the
whole thing next week."
    "Made any progress?"
    The conversation was interrupted by the blast from the car exploding.
Petrol sprayed in all directions and some of the onlookers caught fire.
    "Yes, I've got some pretty radical submissions for the Government ...
but there's likely to be a bit of opposition, even though we'll save close
to three and a half billion nation-wide ..."
    "Sounds promising..." The Minister was more interested in the burning
figures running down the street, screaming in panic.  One of them dived
into the gutter to receive the sideways gush of water from a street-cleaning
tanker.  A few of the others followed suit.
    "You see," Miller continued, "we're proposing that all heroin addicts
gradually and systematically be eliminated."
    "Interesting," the minister murmured, devouring another crepe and not
really believing the madman opposite.  "You mean..."
    "Yes, killed off... You see it's no use keeping them around because
figures show that only five in 100 ever get truly rehabilitated.  The other
95 spend the rest of their comparatively short and ugly lives 
either committing crimes or in gaol, both of which directly or indirectly
cost the taxpayer millions and millions of dollars.  They don't contribute
anything, nobody likes them, they have no future and they are a murderous
drain on the economy.  So why keep them alive?"
    
