Brother Bill By Geoffrey Bingham  

WHEN it comes to birds I am quite helpless, and, as my wife
says, `Hopeless.' This condition has been mine since I was a
small boy. I had a brother - Francis - who built a large aviary,
and kept birds. They were budgies and finches and made quite
a noise. It is this noise which planted itself in my strongly
associative mind and memory, and I grow a bit weak when I hear
the cries and chatterings and whistlings which issue from any
aviary. In fact, any conversation I am having, or any
rumination visiting me, is ignored whilst I peer and stare
towards the centre of bird cries.
  From time to time, the obsession has come upon me. I think I
am due for the blue ribbon for having built aviaries in so many
places, not only in this vast continent, but also overseas. On
top of this, I have dreamed wildly of the vast and lofty
aviaries I could build, even ones in which forty-foot high
trees are covered with bird-wire, and domestic birds lived as
though in the wild.
  Generally I am too shy to talk about these things, but an event
has happened in my life which impels me to break bird-silence
and tell the story. With this is a bit of softness that comes
to you when you are moving towards seventy years - in terms of
age. I notice older people become almost maudlin about 
gardens - flowers, shrubs and vegetables. They also show 
signs of softness in the head or brain about pets. Dogs 
suddenly become precious to them, cats become indispensable, 
and even fish become little individuals all on their own. 
Especially, however, parrots and other birds assume
significant identities.
  If you think about it, older folk either revert to their
childhood affections, or they become childish in a way that
children are childish. That is about the sum of the matter.
  I sometimes assure myself that if the bird that flew in -
willy-nilly - had not been Bill, then I would not have
succumbed to so much parrot interest, or, as my wife would
say, `Obsession.' But then Bill was - and is - a long-billed
corella. To be precise, he is Cacatua Tenuirostris. I have
learned a lot about LBCs in my bird books, but nothing which
would have prepared me for the advent of Bill himself.
  At this point, I suppose I ought to describe to you what a
long-billed corella looks like. The good (modern) book on
parrots says that he is .375 metres in length, including his
130 mm tail. He is a reasonably large white parrot who is
sometimes called a white cockatoo. He does not have a yellow
crest like the sulphur-crested cockatoo, but he does have
yellow under his wings. He has orange scarlet around his eyes,
across his forehead and on the foreneck, which gives him the
appearance of having had his throat cut a bit. He has large
grey eye-rings. His eyes are most unusual. Brown in colour,
they fix you with their stare. No other parrot has quite the
same look. It is that superior look, almost of hauteur, which
tells you he knows all about you. Such is a regular long-
billed corella.

I heard this harsh cry, and when I looked up, a fierce pair of
our territory magpies were hurling themselves at the white
offender. They knew Bill had no right in our six acres of
bushland. Not only had they pegged out their territory, but
they knew that LBCs do not normally inhabit the Adelaide Hills.
Parrots in plenty do that, parrots such as Adelaide rosellas,
green grass parrots, and even - from time to time - little
corellas, who are related to the long-billed variety of the same
name.
  So they were attacking Bill, and he was warning them off with
harsh parrot cries. Because of this they were a trifle wary.
One thing they did do, and that was let him alight on the
gutter of our two-storey house. That was when I saw him
- against the light and the sky of a summer mid-morning. It
was the way he cocked his head on one side, and looked down at
me - gamin-like - that entranced me. I immediately wanted to
know Bill. I called him `Bill' in my mind.
  `Pretty cocky,' I said, and if parrots can be scornful, he was,
at that stupid statement. Anyone knows a long-billed corella
is not pretty. He might be called `handsome' (though I doubt
it), but he is not pretty. He is - well, he is just a
long-billed corella, the tough guy and gamin of all the parrot
species.
  Nobody had warned me against Bill's ilk. Later I heard of a man
who possessed such a parrot, and it chattered away day-long,
had a great dialogue and repertoire, plus a whole stack of
antics, and this man became deeply attached to his bird. In
fact - if I have the matter correctly - he built a business
around that feathered friend, and the business was a pet shop,
mainly featuring birds. The bird was famous, and the shop-owner
lived in the reflection of its glory. One night a covetous
fanatic broke in through the plate-glass window and stole the
bird, and the man gave up his business. He even offered to buy
back his own bird, but - no response. Somewhere, at this very
moment, there is an idolatrous possessor of the stolen bird,
whose eyes are glued to the parrot in its cage, and who is
babbling away like a buffoon, so caught is he in his LBC
addiction. I myself am warned by this event, and by no means 
will give you my home address or even my phone number, for 
fear you or someone else will steal my beloved Bill.
  To get back to the gutter: Bill was cocking his eye down at
me, so I rushed off and hastily gathered up budgie seed and a
few spare crusts. Then I laid these out in inviting fashion
below. His eyesight was telescopic, and to my enormous relief
he flew down, and stood staring at me from a distance. I had
to back away some metres before he would come to the food. When
I did, he walked cautiously, and with a certain amount of
birdly hauteur, towards the grain and crusts. He thought the
whole matter through, after which he scattered the seed in a
lordly sort of way and took up a crust.
  That should have told me that he was a domesticated parrot,
but then I knew little about parrots. When I was a boy my Irish
grandfather kept parrots - large exotic birds like giant
macaws - and they were so large and I was so small, that I have
always had an awe of such creatures. Bill, of course, was not
overly large, but there was just something about him, and I
watched with fascination.
  After a time, he took a crust up to the roof guttering. He
stripped it into pieces. Some he ate, some he dropped. I could
only look at him helplessly, and after a time I decided I had
better get back to my vegetable gardening.
  Now that was just what the LBC wanted of me. He followed me
to the garden. To my trembling delight he even followed me
along the rows where I was planting seed. When I went into my
summer house (that is, my plastic-covered igloo, my hot-house),
he had the curiosity and temerity to try to see what I was
doing. LBCs are like that, I have discovered. They have an
insatiable curiosity, and this is about the only thing they
have which can prove their undoing. Curiosity can catch a
parrot!
  I would be lying if I said I caught him, there and then, in
the hot-house. Oh, no! It took more than a day, I can tell
you. In fact, I was near heart-failure more times than I care
to tell. One cause of that was that my plastic-covered
hot-house igloo is a delicate thing, and just one parrot with
a sharp, long and pointed upper mandible such as Bill possesses, 
could do dreadful havoc in a little time. When he would alight 
on to the hot-house I would go hot and cold. Just a claw or two 
through that plastic sheeting would be enough to make `Kaput!'
  Strangely enough, no damage was done. But Bill loved to forage
in my vegetable garden. He liked carrots, or, rather, rooting
them up. Later I learned that his bill was not overgrown - I
was going to take him to a vet to have it cut down! - but that
he had been given that bill to dig up yams and roots. Well,
he was doing that.
  Most of all, he liked strawberries. Ah! Strawberries! When he
was not doing wild flights across the hills, giving his strange
harsh cry and irritating magpies galore, he would be seated
high on the hot-house, staring down at the strawberries.
Strangely enough, he did not eat them. But when I began picking
them, he did the closest thing to scrounging that I have known
a bird to do. He would cock his eyes at the strawberries, give
me a look in a gleaming eye, and almost say, `What about a few
strawberries, mate?'
  One day I was in the hot-house, planting out young tomato
seedlings. Curious Bill made his way to the door-opening and
poked his head inside. He waddled in, swaggering slightly, and
began systematically to either snip off the seedlings at earth
level or yank them from the soil. Indignation stirred in me.
Then I had an idea. I picked a half-punnet of strawberries. I
strewed them around halfway down the hot-house. I beat a
retreat and closed the eastern door behind me. The western
door, of course, was open. I watched Bill.
  Sure enough, his passion for strawberries overcame his
psittaciformian caution, and he began eating them. I crept
westwards slyly and slowly, and shut the door. I then went for
my big net and a small cage. I guess I trembled a bit as I
approached him, and he, for his part, seemed surprised. It was
a quick operation, and in a flash I had secured Cacatua
Tenuirostris. I savoured that triumph with unholy delight.
  Capturing a threat to your strawberries and your plastic hot-
house may seem a small matter, but let me tell you it wasn't.
There were phone calls to and from the National Parks and
Wildlife people. We chatted long over the phone about Bill, his
threat to our property, and the fact that he was a domesticated
creature. Finally I was issued with a Rescue Permit, and Bill
was validly mine. He was mine under legal permit and licence.
He, of course, knew nothing about this.
  Strangely enough, he did not seem to resent the new cage. In
fact, it was as though he was relieved to be in captivity. Not
that he did not try to undo the catch and little things like
that. He was always busy looking over his cage, but he settled
in. It soon became clear that Bill was a domesticated bird.
Whilst my awe of parrots continued, he took the thing rather
nonchalantly and entertained me and the team of men and women
we have at our place. He could spring, jump, walk and waddle.
He could even do a sort of nodding walk in which his body would
go forward whilst he did a kind of slow march. It was most
ceremonious, and, from what I could gather, was a form of
skiting. He loved it, and so did we. But it was his talking
repertoire that would get us in fits of laughter.
  He talked only when it suited him. It was a kind of ruminative
chatting away to himself.

