<sample>
	<id> R13 </id>
	


	<note> 2009 words </note>
	


	<source> Hardy's People </source>
	


	<bl> By Frank Hardy </bl>
	


	<h> The Funny Side of Fiery Fred </h>
	

A few years ago, I met Keith Miller in the Steyne Hotel, Manly,
and said I wanted to earn an honest dollar creating a book of
cricket yarns.
  Keith, as good a fellow as you'd meet in a day's walk, told me
he'd like to collaborate in such a project, but reckoned that
the only man in the cricket world for the job was Fiery Freddie
Trueman.
  In London soon afterwards, I had a job finding the old Fred,
but eventually met him for the first time, appropriately enough
at Lords cricket ground. Fred was on air as a BBC commentator.
  And it was funny; Fred, who turned out to be no lover of
Geoffrey Boycott, reacted with less than usual enthusiasm when
Boycott reached a record number of centuries. Everybody seemed
wildly enthusiastic, except Fred, who merely said in subdued
tones - &quot;He's doon it!&quot;
  We breasted a bar at lunchtime, and Freddie agreed to work on
a humorous cricket book with me. I asked about Boycott and Fred
replied: &quot;We'll leave him out of the book; what he's done to
cricket isn't funny.&quot;
  I never did find out the reason for Fred's apparent hostility
towards Boycott, but Freddy himself lived up to his reputation
as humorous cricket folklorist and outrageous wit.
  I've often wondered why men become legends in their own
lifetime, when others, of apparently equal ability, do not. I
believe it is because they capture the imagination of ordinary
people by taking the same attitude as them. This applied to
Athol George Mulley as a jockey and to Fred Trueman as a fast
bowler.
  It was all clear at the first meeting I had with Trueman. A
devil-may-care attitude to authority, self-assurance about
his own ability without being arrogant, and a humourous turn
of phrase which flowed naturally.
  Later, I spent a week living at Fred's house in Yorkshire. We
would gather at Peter Parfitt's pub with Neil Hawke and other
former professional cricketers. They talked shop and I've never
laughed so much in my life.
  One afternoon, while Peter was busy serving at the bar, Freddie
said to me: &quot;Peter was a good left-hand bat, but he had a bad
habit of standing on the stumps with his heel when he went for
a hook-shot! Ohh-aye! He did it on the Melbourne Cricket Ground
one day in a Test against Australia and one of the bails fell
off.
  &quot;Everyone was watching the ball, see, so nobody noticed, not
even the umpire. And there was a photo on the front page of a
newspaper the next day, showing Peter putting the bail back on!
But no one had noticed it. He went on to make a 100!&quot;
  On another occasion, over dinner at Fred's house, he told
another story about Peter's bad habit, which is well worth
repeating.
  There was great rivalry between Lancashire and Yorkshire, and
they were playing in Lancashire. One of the umpires thought
Peter was a cunning, tricky devil, so he watched him like a
hawk, didn't he? Ooh-aye!
  A strong wind was blowing. Peter Parfitt went for a hookshot,
tapped the base of one of the stumps with his heel, and a bail
fell off! Everyone was watching the ball hurtle to the
boundary- except the lousy Lancashire umpire! Peter decided to
trick him. &quot;The wind blew the bail off,&quot; he said to the umpire,
quick as a flash. &quot;It's a very windy day.&quot;
  The cunning Lancashire umpire replied, &quot;Yes, it's very windy.
Thou'd better be careful walking back to the pavilion, or it'll
blow yer cap off. I'm giving you out for standing on the
wicket!&quot;
  Fred Trueman reckoned that the rivalry between Yorkshire and
Lancashire in those days was so great that a certain Lancashire
captain invented a prayer to be used in every match against
Yorkshire.
  He'd arrive at the ground before everyone else, kneel down in
the shower and say The Lancashire Lord's Prayer:
  &quot;Dear Lord - Thou'd be the best judge of a cricket match in
all the world. And today, if Yorkshire is the best team, they
will win; if Lancashire is the best team, we will win; if the
teams are equal, the game will be drawn; if it rains cats and
dogs, the game will be abandoned. But if Thou will keep tha'
bloody nose out of it, Lancashire will win by an innings! Amen!&quot;
  Fred was often in trouble with the Marylebone Cricket Club
during his long career. He got into a lot of trouble during one
tour of India and the MCC often fined him large sums.
  Fred denies the apocryphal story which had him saying to a
Maharajah at a dinner: &quot;Pass the sugar, Gunga Din,&quot; but he
admits he stepped out of line quite a few times.
  He shrugged off the heavy fines and suspensions with typical
wit: &quot;They fined me so often that when I got back to England,
I owed the Marylebone Cricket Club money and me wife wanted to
know where I'd been all winter!&quot;
  Using a tape recorder in the pub over dinner, and at Fred's
famous stand-up comic performances, I got down about 16 of
Fred's yarns, wrote the same number myself about Australian
cricket and we made up a few stories together.
  One night late, I asked Fred if he'd ever struck what we call
in Australia a &quot;fluker&quot;. Ooh-aye! Fred had struck a few all
right, hadn't he! So we bounced one-liners about fluking lucky
batsmen between our pipes and beer glasses. After an hour, we
had a story called The Fluker.
  It's too long to relate here (you'll have to buy the bloody
book to get the details), but some idea of it's flavour can be
gleaned from Fred's remark that he struck a Lancashire fluker
who had the &quot;play and miss&quot; shot down to a fine art.
  My meetings with Fred Trueman were a sheer delight, and we wrote
a book to prove that cricket, like grand opera, is funniest at
its most serious moments.


	<h> Hardyarn </h>
	

  My favourite yarn of Fred Trueman's concerns none other than
Douglas Jardine, of bodyline infamy, him-sodding-self.
  Yorkshire were playing Cambridge. There had been some rain and
the wicket was a Sticky Dog.
  A certain Yorkshire bowler worked as a miner during the winter,
and hated all amateur cricketers, - the Fancy Caps, as he
called them
  Yorkshire won the toss and sent Cambridge in to bat. The
conditions suited the bowler (we'll say it was Mick Cowan),
and he got two Cambridge wickets very quickly and cheaply.
Cambridge were two for 27, and Mick had two for 11.
  And who should Mick Cowan see coming in to bat, but the future
amateur captain of England himself - Douglas Snobbynose Jardine!
  Mick wants his wicket bad!
  Douglas Jardine walks to the wicket in all his glory, wearing
an expensive Viyella shirt, a Fancy Cap, silk batting gloves
and handmade boots. Mick reckoned he had 500 quid's worth of
clothes on!
  One of the fieldsmen asked Mick: &quot;Where's he going, then?&quot;
  &quot;I don't know,&quot; Mick Cowan replied, &quot;but he smells nice!&quot;
  Douglas Jardine went to a lot of trouble taking block, had a
good look around to see if any of the Yorkshire tykes had moved
in the meantime, then checked his bat with the umpire again.
  &quot;Let's get on wi' t'game, then,&quot; Mick demanded.
  And when Jardine was ready, he bowled a leg break that sent the
off-stump tumbling over.
  Jardine, the future amateur captain of England, looked at the
wicket in disbelief. He'd been bowled first ball by a common
miner, who'd never even played for England! But, being a
gentleman, he walked towards the pavilion with his bat under
his arm, taking off one of his gloves.
  As he walked past Mick Cowan he said condescendingly: &quot;Well
bowled, Cowan! That was a good ball!&quot;
  And Mick Cowan replied: &quot;Aye, but it were wasted on thee!&quot;


	<h> Truthful Jones on Raffles </h>
	

There I am in the Carringbush Hotel, Collingwood, drinking with
the flies.
  And I'm there for a good reason: some people bought a run-down
pub near the railway line - and changed its name to the
Carringbush Hotel.
  What did they pay me who invented the word Carringbush in Power
Without Glory? One free counter lunch! That's what!
  So I hang about the pub, occasionally dropping hints that some
sort of honorarium should be paid for the use of the name. But
my hints fall on stony ground - like the seed in the Bible.
  I'm just about to get maudlin about the injustice of the world.
Well, can you blame me? There's a Carringbush library, a
Carringbush racehorse, a Carringbush architects' office, and
the odd fish shop or boutique - all called bloody Carringbush.
  Then, I tell myself, it's a great honour, really, to have
invented a name and have it pass into the language of my home
city, when who should walk in but Truthful Jones himself.
  &quot;What are you doing here?&quot; he asks.
  &quot;I might ask you the same question. Last time we met you were
up at Billinudgel ...&quot;
  After admitting the fact, Truthful says he's come to Melbourne
to set up a raffle business, to suss out suitable pubs.
  &quot;I thought raffles had gone out of fashion,&quot; says I .
  &quot;Not in Marvellous Melbourne, they haven't,&quot; Truthful says.
&quot;In fact, I ran the only fair dinkum raffle in Melbourne. Did
I ever tell you about it?&quot;
  &quot;No, I don't think you did. Have a drink and bash me ear.&quot;
  &quot;It happened during the '30s Depression years. Things was crook
with me at the time and I was no Robinson Crusoe, I can tell
you. Funny thing about a depression. The silvertails always say
the unemployed don't want to work, then comes a war and there's
no more unemployed. Now where do them unemployed get to? Killed
in the war, I s'pose.&quot;
  &quot;You could be right at that - but get on with your story.&quot;
  &quot;You're a bit niggly today,&quot; comments Truthful Jones slyly.
&quot;Could it be that you failed to copyright the name Carringbush
and never got a brass razoo for all these places called after
it?&quot;
  He downed his beer without removing the glass from his lips and
waxed philosophical: &quot; Buying raffle tickets is a bad habit to
get into, like paying your income tax and backing racehorses -
once you start, you can't stop. I've run a few raffles in my
time, and I know what I'm talking about.&quot;
  &quot;Oh, I don't know. A lot of honest raffles are run, I reckon.&quot;
  &quot;Well, every man's entitled to his own opinion - but opinions
are funny things - a man who gets wrong opinions either ends up
in jail or in Parliament.&quot;
  &quot;You'd better tell me about that raffle ... what was it
again?&quot;
  &quot;The only fair dinkum raffle ever run in Melbourne. I ran it
myself, so I ought to know ... There was a bloke next door
to me who kept chooks. Out at Preston it was.
  &quot;I used to keep looking over the fence at them fowls, clucking
and pecking away, and I used to say to meself: `Them chooks are
eating their heads off in there while human beings are
starving. It isn't right. Them chooks ought to be raffled.'
  &quot;So one night, I dives over the fence and grabs two big black
chooks. Orphingtons they were. You wouldn't credit the noise
a chook can make when it knows it's going to be raffled - fit
to wake their owner up. At last, I get hold of 'em and put 'em
in a bag under the bed.&quot;
  &quot;And what has stealing two chooks got to do with a fair dinkum
raffle?&quot;
  &quot;Coming to that - not a bad drop of beer this - well, next
day was Saturday and I went down to the pub. And I've got these
two chooks in a spud bag with their heads stickin' out of two
holes.


</sample>
