By Betty Bell Pigs in Mud  

At the farmhouse on the hill, Kate had been given the best bedroom.
Snowy-quilted double bed, silky-oak dressing table with winged mirrors,
so you could see the sides and back of your hair, tiled washstand with flowered
china jug and wash-basin, and a matching chamberpot sitting on the lower
shelf.
    Every surface was covered with embroidered linen, except the floor which
had a rose-patterned linoleum and a bedside rug of tanned calf-hide.
    A double door of lace-curtained glass opened onto the front verandah,
with a dress-circle view of the town across the valley, on its own little
hillside.  Talatta was much the same size as Narrton, but differently arranged
and coloured.
    Houses, pub, corner store, railway station, tiny steepled church,
bakehouse, bank - all bore the red stain of volcanic soil on their wooden
stumps and stairs.  The three roads that threaded the town were of the same
rich red soil, which clung to shoes and bare feet, dusted one's entire person,
and found its way into the homes of the fussiest housewives.
    The town was ringed with cultivated hillsides patched with the pale
green of peanut crops, sage of cowpeas, deep rich emerald of lucerne, red
of fallow paddocks, and it was dotted with the browns and tans and off-whites
of dairy cattle.
    Up the hill, behind the house, was the original family home, unpainted,
sagging-stumped, rust-roofed, bare-floored; but solid in the way of old
pioneer houses.  It was used as bachelor quarters for the two farmhands.
Kate often shared a smoke and a cup of tea with these two eccentrics.
    She would be offered black tea and cheese on dry biscuits for afternoon
tea, smoko as they called it, by teenage Ron, and a roll-your-own cigarette
by old Charly who rolled hers and handed it to her so that she could lick
down the edges.  You didn't use your own spit on a lady's smoke.
    Charly always seated Kate on the one good chair, which he dusted first
with an immaculate handkerchief. 
    `Gentleman always carries a clean handkerchief, dear.  I keep one fer
me nose and one fer good manners, like now.'
    Charly's wide smile exposed brilliantly white false teeth with bright
pink "gums".  The dentures were his pride.  "Had 'em since I was sixteen,
love, when I was humping me bluey.  Used to clean 'em with sand from the
creekbed or ashes from me campfire.  But the best way was if you camped
near an antbed and you could leave yer grinders out at night fer the ants
to clean.  Squeaky clean by morning, mate."
    Yarning and smoking like this was what Charly liked best to do, during
his off time.
    "You do smoke an awful lot, Charly," - Kate worried about his
chain-smoking.
    "Don't you worry, love.  I never do the proper drawback.  Only as far
as me Adam's apple."  He drew a gnarled hand across his throat.  "And I'll
never burn the house down, either.  See, I'm careful!"  He picked out his
cigarette, spat on his hand, and ground the still-hot dumper in his palm.
    Charly was full of yarns.  And Kate was a new audience.  The year she
was transferred to Talatta had been one of lush growth after seven years
of drought, one of the worst the district remembered.  But Charly could
always go one better.
    "When I was a kid around Cunnamulla, the rains came after a long dry.
Me and me mate was camped near the Four-Mile Plain, and I sez to him `I
don't remember seeing this scrub before', and neither did he.  So we took
a closer look.  It turned out to be a patch of thistles, most of 'em higher
than a house, and few as high as a flaming windmill.  And stalks as thick
as a telephone pole.  And up in the fork of one of 'em was a ringtail possum
peeping outa its nest, with a young 'un on its back.  Never seen anything
like it!"
    Charly's tall tails reminded her of her father's.  There were no mermaids
or flying fish in the bush, but the heady mix of fact and fiction was much
the same.
    Charly shared a cottage on the hillside with Ron, a happy-go-lucky
seventeen-year old dropout from one of Sydney's most prestigious schools.
This cut no ice, and he didn't want it to, in Talatta, where no one had
heard of The King's School, Parramatta.
    Ron, for a year, had been Charly's workmate, learning all he could about
the land, in the vague hope that some day he might acquire a property of
his own.  Perhaps a piece of his father's wide acres.  But Ron was really
too happy as he was, too easy going, and much too lazy to have much prospect
of becoming landed gentry; and too much of a rebel, anyway, to have fitted
in.
    After years of boarding-school discipline, Ron was revelling in his
independence, and in his status as a wage earner.
    The cottage, at one time occupied by a share farmer and his wife and
children, still kept some signs of them.  Cheap flowered curtains framed
the front windows.  The lavender-mantled jacaranda, poisonous pink oleanders,
and a tangle of honeysuckle shared the front yard with purple Scotch thistles
and knee-high grass.  On the once-scrubbed and pot-planted verandah stood
a rusty wire stretcher with lumpy striped mattress and a couple of stained
pillows, a pile of comics, Charly's, and a pair of football boots, Ron's.
    The kitchen spread right across the cottage, a sort of all-purpose room.
There was a scratched silky-oak sideboard with the drawers missing and one
door-handle resting on the dusty top; four cheap pine chairs, painted and
repainted, with the last coat a brave scarlet.  A small wood-stove had a
hot-water fountain alongside the firebox.  There was a row of nails for
saucepans, and a potholder which was simply a piece of blue-and-white football
jumper.
    Each man had his own kitchen table, Charly's draped in oilcloth, Ron's
covered with newspaper.  On each table, grouped at one end, sat the basic
non-perishables - sugar, flour, tea, cornflakes, bread, biscuits, all in
brown paper bags.  In a corner were potatoes in a hessian sack; and on the
back verandah, a pile of pumpkins.  For each man, there was a kerosene-operated
refrigerator for meat, butter, eggs and beer.
    Charly's table of basics also included a jar of indigestion tablets,
taken all his life after every meal; and a packet of Epsom salts to keep
his insides moving.  And, of course, his blood pressure tablets.  "Have
to watch that ... but the doc fixes me up every now and again.  Always feel
a lot better after he pumps me arm up a bit."
     Charly's bedroom held a neat row of treasures: a framed photograph
of Sydney Harbour Bridge, a plaster kookaburra and kangaroo won at the
sideshows at the Brisbane Exhibition, and a pink-ribboned kewpie doll.
     A couple of open shelves across the inside wall held his whole wardrobe,
mostly blue workshirts and twill trousers, and navy blue underpants and
singlets, a khaki pullover, wool socks and a black silk pair for best. 
And, neatly folded, his navy serge suit and one white shirt; and a couple
of ties, one brightly striped, one black for funerals.  His checked felt
slippers stood beside the bed and his suitcase, a leather one with someone
else's initials on it in brass lettering, was stowed under the bed, and
only brought out for his annual fortnight in Sydney, his birthplace.
     Charly had spent his last holiday, not in Sydney, but in the district
hospital, the year Kate was at Talatta.  Having what he called A Man's
Operation.  "Been nursing a hernia for years," Ron told Kate.  "Bloody old
stoic!"
     She took the train to the hospital in Kingaroy one Saturday, to see
how he was getting along.  He was hugely enjoying himself.
     "Them nurses, love, only kids like you; but real smart.  And do anything
for yer."
    Just then, one of the "kids" appeared, all starch and smiles.
    "Hullo luv.  This is me mate, the teacher from home." Luv smiled at
Kate, winked at Charly, took his pulse and temperature, settled him more
comfortably on his pillows.
    "Feeling chirpier today, Charly?"
    "Well yair, mate, now the stitches are out and I can get
around a bit."
    "How long since you had a motion?"
    "Aw Gawd, luv, I couldn't tell yer that."
    "Come on now, Charly, I have to write it down."
    "Can't tell yer, luv.  Just can't."
    "Well, Charly, I have to know.  I'm sorry.  I'll have to get matron.
 Could you tell her?"
    "Fer Gawd's sake, leave her out of it.  She's not human, that old
starchpot.  No, I'm not telling anyone, and youse can't make me.  It's me
own private business when I had a motion, and that's all there is to it."
    "Please, Charly, don't be naughty now!  I've got to write it down."
    "Well, if yer must know a man's private business, it was three flamin'
year ago.  With a Mungindi gin."
    Charly was allowed a few hours uptown the day before he was to go home
to Talatta.  He got back to the hospital pleasantly tipsy, with a taxi-full
of presents: silk stockings for the nurses, a flowered hat and a parasol
for Matron, a bag of tomatoes for the wardsman, who ate tomatoes the way
most people ate apples; and an outsize teddy bear and a frilly dress for
the small girl who was the sole occupant of the children's ward.
    Laden with his parcels, and halfway up the hospital steps, Charly wheeled
round, dropping and smashing his concealed bottle of beer on the concrete
steps, and yelling to the taxi driver, "Hey mate, I've forgotten the cakes,"
and an aside to Matron, "Could yer use a bootful o' cakes, Missus?  They
was left over from the fancy dress ball, and they auctioned 'em off up the
street today for the Salvos."
    Charly had enjoyed his hospital stay almost as much as his Sydney trips
... "And a lot cheaper, with a man off the grog."  But he had missed Ron
and the little cottage, and his own room.
     As she sipped her tea and smoked Charly's tobacco, Kate could see most
of Ron's bedroom, a closed-in end of the front verandah.  There was an unmade
bed and wall-to-wall dirty clothes which he would gather up and wash in
two buckets, at the weekend.  His town gear hung from nails on the walls:
cream linen pants, pale blue cotton shirt with two pockets, plaited leather
belt, wide felt hat.  There was a picture of his mother, hair neatly set
in ridged waves and wearing pearls, a cashmere twin-set and a steady smile.
And there was one painting, his own .... "Only thing I was much good at,
at school."   With strong, sure strokes, he had painted the bunched tops
of the wilga trees, and a huddle of sheep, seen from the plane that took
him home on school holidays.  He called it "Green Bombs And Grey Maggots".
    In addition to their wages, Charly and Ron got free milk and free meat,
Charly cutting up the killer on the back verandah, where the sole furniture
was a scarred chopping block and an oil drum for rubbish.
    The two men seemed happy enough to Kate, in their comfortable squalor.
    "Happy as pigs in mud," was how Charly put it.

