By Gay Scales  

"In this district Currawong shed is the key.  Would you both agree?"
  "Well, the squatters seem to think so."
  "Yeah, I reckon the shearers would go along with that."
  W. G. Spence drew a ring around a dot on the map spread out before him.
"Then Currawong Station has to be our target", he said.  "It's our one point
of common agreement."
  The three men were sitting at a table in Spence's hotel room.  It was
long past midnight, and all discussions seemed to lead back to the one plan.
Since the latest coachload of scabs had arrived, this time from New Zealand,
and been escorted to neighbouring properties by a team of mounted police,
one thing had been plain.  The Shearers' Union would have to grasp the
initiative and organise a key shed in the district.  All three knew it would
be seen as an out-and-out act of provocation.  There would be an angry 
confrontation.  Possibly a violent outcome.  But they had to take a stand
now to protect the men.  To turn the other cheek would be seen as weakness.
  It was almost unbearably hot in the small room, and William Lane wished
McNair would get a bit closer to the soap.  The window had been jammed open
with a water jug, but he could still smell the rank odour of the man's body.
God, he looked such a pig sitting there, with that warm boozy breath and
sweating body.  He moved over to the window and wrestled with the rotting
sash to let in more air.  Outside in the street below a handful of the
newly-arrived scabs were sitting disconsolately on their swags.  Lane gave
a sigh and returned to the table.
  "Jamison's shed is bigger.  Awkward to get to, but more shearing pens."
  Spence shook his head.  "Jamison is an animal", he said.  "Even his own
breed don't go for him.  On the other hand, they respect Darling.  He's
a natural leader."
  "Yeah, he's leading us all right", said McNair glumly.  "Bastard's brought
in enough scabs to shear the colony.  I reckon ye'll have ter do something
before it gets outer hand."
   "How many of these scabs know how to shear?" Lane asked.
   "Not too many.  Except for the New Zealanders", McNair added sourly.
"Some of them shear like a bastard."  
   "Yes, and they're hungry enough to do it, too."
   They fell silent while each man thought of the war that was taking place
around them.  Strike camps were pitched across the western plains of
Queensland, and police deputies were guarding them day and night, seeking
any excuse to shut them down and get the men off the land.  There were eight
hundred men in one camp at Wilcannia, and more `free labourers' arrived
each week by paddle steamers which carried the wool bales through the plains
on the way to the ports of Australia.           
   The real truth was that the pasturelands had been devastated by overstocking
in the past.  Millions of tiny black feet, which carried the wealth of the
new nation on their backs, had destroyed the turf which was not suited to
the grazing of large herds of cloven-hooved animals.  The rich western plains
had been eaten away and eroded within twenty years of the sheep's arrival.
Now the boom was over both pastoralists and shearers were left to face the
consequences.
   "Are we going ter do something", McNair asked? "Or are we just goin ter
talk about it?"
   While the two leaders considered the question McNair sat slumped in the
cane chair, thinking of the sort of conditions the men would face in the
shearing sheds tomorrow.  Work would begin at daybreak and continue to sunset,
with only a short break for food and smoke-oh.  The contract with Darling
had the usual clauses which forbade swearing in the shed or treading on the 
fleeces, which sometimes got torn by a shearer's sack moccasin  If
Darling wanted to really play it tough he would insert the `raddling' clause
as a means of with-holding payment.  Red raddle was used by some squatters
to cheat men of their pay after the work was done.  By marking a badly-shorn
sheep with red crayon, it would not be counted in the final tally.  But
there were many instances of squatters condemning a whole penful, and dodging
a day's pay.  Darling had never used that tactic, to be fair.  But if they
pushed him hard enough ... perhaps?  Knowing which way he was going to jump
was the problem.  Compared with some of the others he was a gentleman. 
Yet sometimes the gentlemanly type were the worst.  With their English accents
and country squire manners, they would smile and nod their heads.  `My dear
chap, you may have a point there'.  Later on they would stand by, still
smiling, while the mounted police beat the Christ out of you.  Even worse,
they were part of an interlocking system of pastoral and political interests
that went from the country magistrate right up to the colonial governor.
There was never anything you could actually prove about collusion.  It
just so happened that a word in the right ear at the Queensland Club meant
your name never appeared on a shearing shed contract again.  The word was
spread on the bush telegraph. 
   "Well, come on", he said aloud.  "Make up yer bloody minds."
   Spence looked at Lane, as if waiting for a suggestion.  Finally he stood
up and sighed.
   "We're going to unionise Darling's shed", he said. "It's as good a place
to start as anywhere else."
   "Good.  I'll go and tell the others."
   Spence raised a warning finger.  "Tell them the union is totally opposed
to violence of any kind.  Our men will run the meeting at the shed.  You
just make sure everyone gets there, understand?"
   McNair nodded and made his way to the door.  The last they heard of him
was the clatter of boots running down the stairs that led to the front bar.
After he had been gone a few minutes Lane looked up from the shorthand notes
he was sorting out into several piles.  They were scraps of background colour
which he would thread through the story for The Worker in Brisbane.  After
adding a few more squiggles something occurred to him.
   "It's only an opinion", he said, staring out the window so as to avoid
Spence's glance.  "But something tells me we could do without Kerosine Jock
McNair."
   "No, no, you're wrong, Billy.  He needs a bit of watching, I'll admit.
But he's got as much fire in his belly as any three other men I can think
of around here."
   "So long as he keeps it in his belly."

                   
On Sunday morning there were family prayers at Currawong, the one day of
the week when the Darling family had breakfast together.
   They gathered with the servants in the large, formal drawingroom where
Mr. Darling read the text of the week from the Darling Family Bible.  It
was a household rule that prayers started at eight on the dot.  At precisely
that moment he opened the gold embossed King James edition at Timothy 1,
Chapter 6.
   "Let as many servants as are under the yoke", he intoned, "Count their
own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and His doctrine
be not blasphemed ..."
   The door was already closed when Maureen sped along the hall from the
diningroom where she had been laying the table.  At the last minute the
cook had reminded her of extra serving spoons for the stewed apple and rhubarb.
There were sausages and flapjacks to follow, and he was dancing about the
stove with a pan of batter which had to be poured into the pans exactly
one minute after they raised their voices to sing the hymn.  He alone was
excused from prayers on the grounds of his heathenism.  When she opened
the door they were all seated in rows, and Maureen had to make a place for
herself.  Trying not to rustle her skirts, she knelt down beside the
housekeeper and made the sign of the cross.  Nesta noticed her mother's
scowl. 
   Maureen had attended six o'clock mass at a neighbouring farm, and she
thought this a very strange service indeed.  So much talking and sermonizing.
Mr. Darling's words sounded quite fierce, too.  Not at all like the lovely,
liturgical words spoken by the priest.
   "But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition
..."
   Was Mr. Darling, she wondered, speaking of himself?  After all, he was
the only rich man here.  Was perdition a place or a state?  Whatever it
was, he didn't seem to think much of it.
   "For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted
after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with
many sorrows ..."
   Out in the hot kitchen the Chinese cook was piercing sausages with a
sharp fork.  They were sizzling in the pan at the front of the stove, and
he now ladled them on to a serving platter which he set in the lower oven.
Two iron frying pans now took the centre of the stove, and the fat began
to splutter soon as he poured ladlefuls of batter into evenly sized circles.
On a warming shelf above the stove sat baking dishes of fried chops and
eggs, all swimming in mutton fat.  Served with a crockful of boiled potatoes
the domestic staff would find them appetising enough.  Sunday was a treat
for them too.  All the meat they could eat, and an hour's rest afterwards
before preparations for the Sunday dinner were started.  Yes, the hymn had
begun.  The cook grinned to himself at the perfection of his timing. The
master would be rejoicing in the faith of his fathers plus the fact that
his nose would tell him of the delights which would soon be awaiting him
in the diningroom. The mistress would be noticing which girls did not close
their eyes in prayer, and Little Missee, with the hair like spun gold, would
be noticing her mother.  In his mind he liked to imagine the Christian ritual
next door -  right down to the housekeeper peering short-sightedly at the
hymn book while her hands ran over the keyboard.  What a strange God these
people worshipped!  So particular about how men and women behaved in public!
   `Where pity dwells the peace of God is there.
    To worship rightly is to lo-oo-ve each other.
    Each smile a hymn, each kindly deed a prayer.'
   Crisp sausages were surrounded by the plump, speckled flapjacks.  All
ready now, but where was that girl?  The cook looked anxiously towards the
door which didn't open as it should.  The piano had stopped, and he could
make out the sound of chairs being pushed back on the polished boards.  Where
was that girl?
   But Maureen Corrigan had been waylaid by Mrs. Darling.  With one hand
on the doorhandle she was about to open the door when Mrs. Darling bore down
on her.
   "My dear child." Her voice, with its tired drawl seemed to penetrate
the entire room.  " I really can't have you joining us for family prayers
like this.  I really can't."
    Now the focus of all eyes, Maureen could feel her cheeks begin to burn.
 A couple of the other servants started to giggle, and she cast them a
withering look.
    "The Holy Roman Church will make arrangements for your worship while
you are at Currawong.  This is a Protestant household, my dear, and therefore
we have the right to make our arrangements as well."
    Tears sprang to the girl's eyes.  What had she done wrong?  It must
have been something really awful judging by the vexed expression on the
dowager's face.  To hide her shame she turned the handle of the door, and
darted into the kitchen where the cook scolded her for her tardiness.
    
