By Colin Thiele  

  The next five years of Anna's life raced by as if time, like a river,
had hurtled over a waterfall. She began to have her children in quick
succession now - Esther in 1853, Ernst in 1854, and Hermann in 1855. They
were followed by two miscarriages before the cycle established itself again
with the births of Clara in 1857 and Edwin in 1858.
  Almost overnight the house seemed to be bursting at the seams. There was
always a baby at her breast or on her hip or crawling about under her feet.
There were constant alarms when toddlers disappeared - chilling fears that
they were drowning in the well, wandering lost in the wheat crop, or being
bitten by death adders. There were dangers from boiling water and fire,
and from sudden illnesses that were for ever stalking children and threatening
to carry them off in the night.
  Yet, in spite of the turmoil, Anna's home was a warm and happy place.
Little Hans was old enough to fetch and carry, and Johann as always was
strong and helpful. The heifer had long since grown up and produced calves
of its own. There was milk and butter and cream, eggs from the small flock
of hens, turkeys for Christmas dinner, and plenty of vegetables in the garden.
If flour ran short, Anna kibbled some wheat in the shed and made meal cakes
to tide them over.
  She was not alone in her burst of childbearing. Aunt Maria kept pace for
a time, her last child - Martin - being born on the eve of her thirty-ninth
birthday. There were now four small Australian-born Schmidts to fill out
the family, and Franz, after so much heartbreak and tragedy, was at last
able to thank God for his goodness. Christiana bore two more daughters,
Esther Himmeldorf three sons, and Magdalena a son and a daughter. Freya
Hartmann tragically lost three of her five children in infancy, but timid
Emma Nitschke surprised the district by outstripping them all. In addition
to young Karl, who had been born so dramatically in Rio on the outward voyage,
she now produced seven children in five years, all as strong as lion cubs.
Two sets of twins had set her on her multiplying way. It was clear that
the productivity of the people had more than matched the productivity of
the land. Both the church and the school had had to be enlarged.
  In the midst of all this, Johann was prospering. Each year added something
to his wellbeing, steps on the stairway to success. The harvest of 1853
was phenomenal; record plantings and abundant rain had led to a cornucopia
of wheat. And there was an insatiable market for it on the goldfields.
Overnight South Australia became the granary of the country. Prices soared.
Wheaten flour was powdered gold, more precious than the metal the diggers
were sweating and dying for. Teamsters strained and cursed to get waggon-loads
of it to waiting ships. Paddle-steamers were being built to haul it up the
Murray to Victoria, where other teams could overland it to the fields. Millers
laboured short-handed.
  For there was only one shadow on the sunshine of prosperity. There were
no labourers to do the labouring. They had all gone to the diggings. It
was April before Johann had threshed and bagged the last bushel. He had
slaved away unremittingly since December - four months of back-breaking
toil, haste, and anxiety, for ever looking up at the sky for signs of storms
or smudges of smoke. And he was one of the lucky ones, because Bruno Bormann
again helped out during the main part of the season, and Anna herself worked
miracles. Though pregnant again, tending two children, and acting as caterer,
cook, cleaner, washerwoman, milkmaid, poulterer, wood-chopper, and nurse,
she nevertheless worked long hours out in the wheat crop with the men -
raking, carrying, stacking, bullock driving, sieving, and bagging.
  The rewards were rich. The ten acres of wheat yielded better than 20 bushels
to the acre, and the price was a pound a bushel. To celebrate, Johann bought
an 80-acre allotment nearby that had come on the market because the owner
- an Englishman named Wiggins - had decided to sell up and run off to the
diggings too. It was beautiful country, so mildly undulating that it looked
as if the folds of the land itself were breathing gently in sleep.
  On the night after he had signed the purchase documents and paid the money,
Johann sat silently in front of the rough fireplace with Anna. Hans and
Esther were both asleep. Outside, the cow was bellowing for its calf. After
a while Johann put his hand on Anna's arm, and pressed it gently.
  `Anna', he said, `you have brought me luck, unbelievable luck.'
  She stirred. `God has brought you luck, not I .'
  He nodded. `Yes, of course he has. But you are at the heart of it. I think
he sent you to me on purpose.'
  `He ordains everything', she answered simply. `So he is the one for both
of us to thank.'
  He sat in a reverie. `There is no doubt that we are the lucky ones, we
who came later. All of us - Franz, Andreas, the Kreigs and the Kramms, cranky
Otto Nitschke - we are all so much better off than the poor souls who led
the way. We had a little money, we could get our own land and our own animals.
And now we have struck the high prices for wheat and flour. That ten-year
gap made all the difference.'
  She nodded and sighed. `But it hasn't been easy for us, either.'
  `No, but think of those poor creatures at Klemzig and Hahndorf, at Lobethal
and Bethany, right at the very beginning. They had nothing. Nothing. They
even had to borrow money to live. And then for years and years they had
to labour to pay off their debts.'
  `But they did it, every penny.'
  `Some are still doing it. But we have got so much further, and so much
more quickly.'
  She stood up. `Johann, you are starting to talk like a landlord. Soon
I suppose you will want to buy one of those new reaping machines.'
  `Never. I'd rather trust in my own two hands.' He chuckled. `But Otto
Nitschke was so furious when he lost some of his crop in that storm last
month that he'll probably want to buy one tomorrow.'
  Not long after this, Johann met Joseph Seppelt again. It was after a special
harvest-thanksgiving service at Langmeil, which many of the outlying families
attended. The men were standing in knots outside as they always did, discussing
wheat, weather, water, and wickedness, and interchanging points of view
on doctrine and dogma. Because they had met once before, Johann and Joseph
Seppelt shook hands cordially and immediately fell into friendly conversation.
It went on for a long time, and Anna, surrounded by a grouup of older prattling
women, was beginning to grow impatient. Esther was petulant, and Hans kept
on disappearing between different pairs of male legs as he trotted from
one cluster to another.
  She managed to get Johann away at last, and they set off for home across
country, Hans trotting between them, she carrying baby Ernst in the shawl,
and he hoisting little Esther on his shoulders.
  `What on earth kept you and Herr Seppelt so long?' Anna asked. `Tobacco?'
  He laughed uproariously. `No, the tobacco was a failure. And some of his
men - the ones he brought out specially - have left him and gone off to
the diggings.'
  She swished a fly from the baby's face. `I told you that tobacco wouldn't
grow.'
  `It grew', he answered gaily. `Perhaps it grew too well. The leaf was
much too rank.'
  `And it took you such a long time just to hear that?'
  He leaned toward her as they walked, and dropped his voice in mock
conspiracy. `We didn't talk about tobacco. We talked about something much
more important.'
  `What? Mettwurst?'
  `Wine!' He glanced sidelong at her, with his look of boyish enthusiasm.
`What do you think of that, Anna? Wine. Seppelt has high hopes of it. And
there are others, too, who are already growing vines.'
  `Why all this ecstasy about wine? Does it mean so much to you?'
  He leaned toward her again. `Yes, it does, to both of us.'
  `I don't see why.'
  `Because we are going to plant vines too, on some of our new land. We
are going to grow grapes and make wine. And if we are unable to make it
properly, Herr Seppelt will show us how. He will even buy our grapes if
we want.' He eyed her excitedly `So what do you think of that? Etwas ganz
erstaunendes, nicht? Astonishing, isn't it?'
  He put Esther down for a minute, hoisted Hans on to his shoulders, and
galloped off like a horse, whinnying and cavorting in front of Anna. The
little boy shrieked and kicked with laughter. Finally they came galloping
back and turned sharply before her, scuffing up the dust. `Yes, vines',
he repeated, jubilant and panting. `What do you think of that, eh?'
  She laughed. `I think I have a lunatic for a husband. He is not like an
earnest German at all. He is only a schoolboy - or a frustrated horse.'
  He walked beside her sedately while he recovered his breath. `But it is
a good idea, isn't it - to plant vines? We will still grow wheat, of course.
But the vines will be something special, something extra, something to fall
back on if things should change. Who knows, some day the vines may be more
important to us than the wheat.'
  She loved him for his vitality. `Of course you shall plant your vines',
she answered. `And I shall pick the first bunch of grapes.'
  When the little vineyard was planted 12 months later, it looked beautiful
- the soil combed out so carefully, the rows of vines so symmetrical that
they looked like the painstaking design of an old German craftsman; and
in a way they were. 
  `All we have to do is wait', Johann said delightedly as they stood gazing
at the incredible orderliness of it all, `and in God's good time the wine
will redden on our fingers.'
  While all this was going on, there was more and more movement up and down
the valley. It was impossible to imagine that only 15 years previously the
whole place had scarcely been seen by white men's eyes. There was a new
congregation at Gnadenfrei, new settlements northwards at Stockwell, and
beyond the valley at Pine Hut Creek and St Kitts. The township of Tanunda
was growing, bidding fair to swallow Langmeil altogether.
  Some of the newcomers came individually, but most moved up in groups,
preserving family ties or shipboard units, just as Traugott Gross's `Heimwald
Herde' had done at Gutendorf. They were all Germans or Wends, everyone else
having rushed off to the goldfields. They were used to hard work and frugal
living, using every minute of daylight for useful labour, every minute of
darkness for rest and sleep.
  The shortage of labourers affected nobody more severely than Angas and
some of the other large landowners, so they came to bless the stolid Germans
who stayed at home and worked hard, instead of chasing rainbows over the
horizon. Additionally, as Anna had pointed out, some of the German settlers
felt they owed a debt to Angas for the way he had helped their countrymen
with offers of loans and parcels of land in their first destitute years.
Even so, providing all the labour that was needed, especially at harvest
time, was an impossible task.
  Back at Gutendorf, the women and children took up some of the burden.
The older Himmeldorfs - Helena and Rudolf - who had helped Anna sell vegetables
to the Kapunda carriers years before - were now 15 or 16, Adolf Noack was
over 12, and many of the younger children were nine or ten. 
                                                                   
