Gladiator By Ian Beck  

There was no blood-gutter on the sword and when I drove it through him the
blood sprayed out like the dye in one of the exploding bladders the clowns used,
and lifted him a good two feet off the ground. He flapped around like a landed 
fish and hosed the wall under the sponsor's dais, and picked up his net and 
draped it over him to milk a few extra laughs, and chased the donkey boys when 
they tried to take him out.
  He'd caught me with the butt end of the spear in that last panic-rush of his,
and walking back to the armoury I felt the way you feel when you dive deep -
really deep - and the surface is a long way off. For a moment I was a kid again,
moving up through shafts of green light with a bag of abalone on my wrist and
the shadow of the boat above, at the furthest full-stretch limit of my breath.
  The Greek was waiting for me under the armoury gate. They called him the 
Greek because he dressed like a priestess, but he was really a German with one 
of those tangled surnames that pop the spit from your mouth when you try to 
pronounce them.
  "They'll be selling gold statues of you in Rome by the end of the month, he 
said.
  I brushed past him and sat on the big two-sided bench that ran the length of 
the room. It was cool and dark and as close to a sanctuary as I was ever going 
to get.
  "They won't see stuff like that in the provinces again."
  "Whose idea was it to sand the arena?" I said.
  "It needed it."
  "You almost got me killed."
  They'd brought in beach sand from somewhere and hadn't washed it properly. 
Moving around on it was like trying to slide on flypaper.
  "You did alright," the Greek said. "You really showed them something."
  "Get me a bucket."
  He picked up a leather bucket and held it under my chin, and I threw up a 
load of blood-coloured oatmeal. The pressure in my head was so bad I thought 
my eyeballs were going to pop.
  "Did he stick you, Dysus?"
  "He didn't get near me," I said.
  "You get yourself some steam and a massage. You've been working hard."
  "I'm quitting, Kurt."
  There was a roar from the arena - a truncated outburst that broke into jeers 
and clapping, like a fountain splashing onto stone when the pressure turned 
off. I could picture what had happened: someone had rolled out from under a 
spear or net.
  "That's it."
  "Listen ... we'll talk about this later. At the moment you're like a drunk 
with a hangover. Get yourself some steam..."
  He gave me his dirty-mouth leer - that lousy sweets-for-the-good-little-
children grin. I had wiped it off his face a couple of times in the past, but 
always came back.
  "Listen, Dysus," he said, "How many toothpicks have you got now? Three isn't 
it?" Toothpicks were the small ornamental swords they gave you after your 
twentieth combat.
  "You'll have four more before you quit - two more than the Cypriot. I can
guarantee it. You're good. I know it - they know it."
  I looked at him. I could put a finger through his eye - right up there until
the threads and the eye reversed itself in its socket.
  "Alright," he said, "alright. We'll discuss it properly tomorrow."
  I tossed my wristbands at his feet and headed for the pool. The water was
steaming and the wood panelling gave off the smell of a pine forest after
rain. I rinsed the shreds of vomit from my mouth and washed my hair. The
pads of my fingers were so rough they could scrub sandstone, and the fingers
had stiffened and calcified. When I folded them into fists arthritic twinges
shot through the joints.
  It was time to get out - before the night sweats came and I started looking
for an opponent's moves on the tip of the spear instead of deep down in the
ultimate focus of the eye, where the thrusts show a fraction of a second
before they're made. At times now the hilt of a sword felt awkward in my
hand, and a dirty little undercurrent of fear had begun to show in some of
my moves.
  Money was no problem. I had the house and the vineyard and 10,000 a year
from the lumber yard my father had left me, so I'd get by. I would not end
up like Delius - as a masseur and stud for the capital's divorcees - or the
Cypriot, murdered in his sleep in a night shelter for alcoholics. I could
live comfortably on my own land and hunt with the local gentry.
  But there was something else, apart from the money - something I couldn't
focus on properly. I did not feel it in my heart. In most people the heart
is the exact size and hardness of a walnut. But I felt it just the same. It
was like I had lost something valuable in a vault full of my own money.
  I dozed until the water turned cold, and dried myself in front of the fire.
I needed a drink and a woman with fresh sheets on her bed and that kittenish
manner the Roman whores have. A few drinks would kill the played-out
feeling. Afterwards there would be a kind of release, and maybe - if I woke
without a hangover and the morning was fresh - the certainty that things
had really changed.

  It was dark by the time I left, and the streets were empty. I had never been
in a town, even a garrison town, as scared as that one. The doors and
windows at street level were barred and the lights in the houses glowed in
back rooms, as though the owners were gambling there. The circus had
frightened them, and the streets had been stripped of anything likely to
attract a mob.
  I walked past rows of identical houses and into a square where a restaurant
lit three storeys and sent a downpour of conversation into the street. The
downstairs section was crowded and smelled of mutton and the cheap
drunkard's wine they sold by the hogshead, but the voices and the whores'
phony laughter were better than the deadness outside.
  Somebody called to me but I ignored them and moved up the stairs to the
roof. There were banquet-sized tables in the kind of arrangement you see at
conventions, and smaller tables for couples and the old people who eat
alone.
  A group of ten or twelve men were sitting at one of the tables and talking
about something in low voices. I couldn't make out what they were saying,
but judging by their expressions it was either politics or money.
  I sat at a table bleached by spilled wine and waved the waiter over.
  "You did well today," he said, as he filled the cup.
  "Put some water in that, I said.
  "Certainly." He was a weak-looking kid, but with the sort of confidence that
comes with money. His father owned the place.
  "I saw you fighting," he said.
  "You made some money then."
  "No. I was betting on the other fellow."
  "So was I," I said.
  He laughed and put the jug on the table. "With the manager's compliments,
he said.
  I drained the cup and glanced back at the big table. The man at the
centre of the group had plaited hair and the eyes of someone used to the
glare of water. A fisherman probably, or a bargee. Despite the desert
suntans they looked the way any group of Romans look when they're talking
among themselves - like a street gang plotting a revenge killing.
  The waiter had brought oil for the bread and I dipped a finger into it and
dabbed some onto my eyelid. There is a kind of webbing over my right eye
where the flesh has melted. I got it in a fight in an army canteen when
somebody threw boiling fat at the fellow behind me. But I see alright.
  I took a good long drink and pulled up the collar of my jacket against a
draught. It hit me then, worse than the Turk had hit me. I had put pressure
on the bruise or a nerve end, and the effect was the same as one of those
minor taps that can knock you cold.
  I threw up again, and this time it was as though somebody was dragging my
stomach lining out on the end of a line. I started grunting, and each time
a half-cupful of blood splashed onto the tiles and tightened my throat
another notch. This is it, I thought, this is how it ends, and isn't it the
way you knew it would be - a dirty embarrassment that leaves you with about
as much dignity as a derelict with his pants full.
  Then the rending feeling eased and my throat opened up, and I could breathe
again.
  The man from the banquet table was standing in front of me.
  "Can you see me properly?" he said.
  "Yes," I said.
  "Your eyes are red. You've burst some blood vessels."
  I took a deep breath. I felt better. I felt as though I had broken through
something.
  "Keep your head down," he said.
  "Go to hell," I said.
  He crouched beside me and dabbed at the pool of blood with a finger.
  "He's alright," somebody at the big table said. "It's too light-coloured for
arterial blood. He's just vomiting wine."
  "You need a doctor," the man said. He said it as though we had both agreed
that was the best and most reasonable thing to do.
  "Get back to your friends," I said. "I don't need your help."
  "You ought to be more polite, friend," a voice behind me said.
  A man with a weightlifter's build and the smile of someone who genuinely
likes to fight had moved up to the table. I smiled back and shook my left
arm to bring the leather worker's knife down my sleeve.
  "It's alright, Peter," the man said. And then, to me: "Your pupils aren't
focusing properly."
  "I'm alright," I said.
  "Rest for a while."
  He moved back to the table and I pressed my hands against my eyes and
watched a collection of red sparks jump and cartwheel. I felt light-headed
but clear in my head, as though I had been on a fast. The sparks turned to
points of residual light and I pushed my chair away and glanced back at the
banquet table.
  The fisherman was tearing up a loaf of flat bread and passing the pieces
around. The shreds looked like pieces of speckled flesh. For a moment I
thought of taking my wine across and leaving it with them, but the business
with the bread had a ritualistic quality that sealed them all in their own
special place. The idea of joining them was one of those infantile impulses
you get sometimes - like wanting to romance a whore. The sentiment was
laughable, and I grunted in disgust and rose from the table.
  On the way downstairs there was some kind of commotion behind me, and I
turned with the floor at eye level and saw that the group had broken up into
squabbling cliques. They were yelling at each other and sticking out chins
and thumping the wood hard enough to bounce the plates. The fisherman was
the only one who was still calm. He was looking at the dried blood on his
fingers and smiling in a smug kind of way, as though he'd just worked out
how to pay back an enemy.
  So you're a Roman after all, I thought. Another gentleman-savage - the kind
who gets all shivery when some kid screams at a spear thrust.

