The immigrant By Andrew Lansdown  

The first few days? Yes, I can remember.
  I came on account of the coal strike. We were out for a year. This was
1925. At the end of it, they wanted us to go back on less pay. So I booked
for Australia. Assisted Passage. Came out on The Bendigo.
  When we docked at Fremantle, it was sweltering. This was a week before
Christmas. We were thinking of snow and plum puddings. As I was disembarking,
I heard one of the crew say, "I'll just pop down to the stokehole to cool
off a bit." That raised a laugh.
  Well, after the heat, the first thing I noticed was the wharfies. Honest
to goodness! I'd never seen such a hard-faced lot of men - not even in the
trenches. Looked as if they'd hang you for sixpence. Blimey, I thought,
I hope they're not all like this.
  And another thing. There was a young chap standing at the bottom of the
gangplank giving out headache tablets. Aspros. Little sample packets. That's
a good start, I thought, giving you headache tablets first up. I began to
wonder if I shouldn't have taken my brother's advice and gone to Canada.
  There was a fellow selling hop beer in front of the customs building.
He wasn't having much luck. Everyone just wanted to clear customs and get
about making their fortunes. Well, he looked pretty dejected, and I was
feeling thirsty, so I thought I'd part with a penny. He took my money happily
enough, but then he started giving me the eye. Looked me up and down, hands
on his hips. "Whatcha come here for?" he said. "Got enough Poms to clear
the land already. That's all we want you for." I dropped his glass and it
shattered on the pier. "See if you can get a Pom to clear that up for you,
then," I said, and left him to it.
  After customs, they shunted us off to the Immigrant Home, where we had
a wash and a meal. Then a chap came and gave us a pep talk. "What do you
think of Australia?" he asked. Well, I guess none of us thought much of
it at all, so noone said anything. Finally one of the women said, "It's
as hot as Africa." And that set him off. "You're better off coming to this
part of the Empire, Madam," he said. "You can lie down in this country anywhere
you like without fear of tigers or lions or any wild animals." Well, I don't
know if she appreciated that. Her only thought of lying down was on satin
cushions. Anyway, this chap kept it up for a good ten minutes, telling us
what a wonderful country Australia was and how we were lucky to be here.
  Then another fellow came with a parcel of papers. He had a list of jobs
and he read them out, and you had to put up your hand if you thought you
were suitable. There were a lot of jobs for dairying, but they were low
wages. Fifteen shillings a week with keep. Some of them as low as twelve
shillings. Then he started announcing jobs on the wheat farms - the `wheat
belt'. They were better paid, I remember one clear enough. "Wanted, youth,
strong, must be able to cut suckers. 18 shillings a week with keep." I looked
at the fellow next to me. "Heaven knows what a sucker is," he said. "Us
probably," I said. Another one I remember. There was a man wanted to drive
a team for a harvester at 30 shillings a week. Only you had to be experienced.
The chap next to me said, "By George, it must be a wonderful fella to get
30 bob a week." Now I had my own pony in the pits, so I thought maybe that'd
pass for `experience'. But by the time I put my hand up, another fellow
had beat me to it.
  Well, finally there were only one or two of us left. Everyone else had
got a job. I said, "What else is there?" "Well, there's coal mining down
south at Collie," he said. "Only I don't think they want anyone at present."
"Well, I don't want to go in the pits anyway," I said. "What else is there?"
So he rummaged around in his papers and found one that said, "Wanted, young
man, must be strong, used to horses, and willing to work. Twenty-five shillings
a week and keep." So I took it. Next thing they had me on a train to South
Walgoolan.
  I had to change trains at Perth. Transferred to the Kalgoorlie Express.
Why they called it an `Express' is beyond me. It stopped at every station.
I heard some of the passengers refer to it as The Rattler. I asked the guard,
"How will I know when I get to Walgoolan?" We'd gone through five or six
stations, and I hadn't heard him call a name out once. "Oh," he said, "the
same as everybody else." "How's that?" I said. And he said, "Stick ya head
out the window and when ya come to Walgoolan, that's it." So I had my head
out the window half the night to make sure I didn't miss it.
  Couldn't see anything much, of course. But one thing that did surprise
me was the fires. There were little fires all along the track and across
the countryside. I'd never seen anything like it. I asked one chap what
they were. "That's just people camping out," he said. "What people?" I asked.
"Fettlers and road gangs mostly," he said. "Maybe some cockies burning off." 
Well, I didn't know about `cockies'. When I asked him, he just laughed and 
said, "You're a new chum." Anyway, the fires were strange and beautiful to me. 
About the only beautiful thing I saw those first few days.
  There was an old man on the train for the first leg. He was a German.
And the thing that struck me as odd was that he liked England. He said several
times, "England is a beautiful country, it'll grow anything." Maybe he only
said it to be polite. A kind gesture to a `new chum'. Anyway, we talked
a bit about what England could grow. He got off at the Northam station.
  I tell you something that took my fancy at Northam. There was a chap on
the siding selling hot tea in beer bottles. One shilling a bottle! But he
sold the lot. Seems I was the only one on the train who didn't understand
the distances in Western Australia. 
  We pulled into a place called Merredin at about 5 o'clock in the morning.
It was just light, but there were a lot of people on the siding. Everyone
was standing back a bit from this man, watching him. He held the body of
a little girl. Rigor mortis had set in. She was curled up with her hands
clasped about her knees, so he held her awkwardly. And he was weeping. Weeping
without a thought for anyone around him. I had never heard a man weep like
that before. It frightened me. It seems the little girl had been lost since
late afternoon. They were afraid that she had wandered into the bush. They'd
had parties out looking for her all night. Found her just before the train
pulled in. She'd climbed into a powder magazine which was on the platform
awaiting shipment to Fremantle. The lid had fallen down and locked itself.
No one heard her calling out on account of the box being padded on the inside.
Smothered, poor mite. The train was late leaving Merredin. Everyone had
got off, including the driver.
  Burracoppin was the next major siding. And there were camels there! A
whole herd of them in a holding paddock by the hotel. The travel people
in London had suggested I go to Persia, to work for the Anglo-Persian Oil
Company. When I decided against the idea, I thought I'd lost my chance of
ever seeing a camel. Except in a circus maybe. Now here they were in Australia.
One of the passengers told me that the camels were used by the men who serviced
the Number One Rabbit-Proof Fence. I asked him, "What's a Rabbit-Proof Fence?"
"Like it sounds," he said. Then he asked me where I was heading. When I
told him, he laughed and said, "You'll learn about the Fence soon enough.
Walgoolan's the wrong side."
  Walgoolan was next up. I was the only one who got off the train. I must
have been a pathetic sight, standing on the platform with my gear littered
about and not a soul around. I felt pathetic. Walgoolan was just a name.
There was a big stack of wheat on the siding, and a tin shed at back of
it. And a small corrugated-iron store across the road. That was it. Walgoolan.
  I wandered around the wheat stack. It was huge. Fifty yards by fifteen,
and maybe seven high. Hundreds of sacks stacked like slabs of stone. And
mice! Scampering everywhere like tufts of shadow. Then I sat on my trunk
and waited.
  And that's another thing. Parrots. There were dozens of parrots.
Twenty-eights and Smokers, as it turned out. Smokers are extint now, of
course, but they were plentiful then. And the thing that intrigued me was
the way the parrots walked. They even climbed the sacks one foot after the
other. The birds back home hop, so it tickled me, seeing birds walk like
people.
  Eventually I saw some smoke coming out of the store, so I wandered over
and knocked. A chap came to the door and said, "What d'ya want?" I said,
"Well, actually I've come to work for a man around here, by name of Johnson."
"Which one?" he said. "Oh," I said, "is there more than one?" "There's three."
I had written it down, so I got out my bit of paper and told him, "S.L.
Johnson." "Him," he said. "He'll be in about 8 o'clock." This was a bit
before seven. "How will I know him?" I asked. "There'll be a lot of people
in shortly," he said. "Your man'll be in a Chev. Ford. It's got no canopy
on, and he'll have a little black dog sitting alongside of him."
  Well, pretty soon farmers started arriving with their wheat. Waggons and
trucks, Model T's and Morrises. And on the dot of 8, along came a chap in
a Chev. Ford. I walked up to him and said, "Excuse me, are you Mr Johnson?"
"No," he said, "There's no misters in this country. I'm Sam Johnson." "Well,"
I said, "would you be S.L. Johnson?" "That's me all right." So I said, "I've
come to work for you - from the Immigrant's Home." "Oow," he said, sort
of surprised. "Oow, I believe I did send down for a man." As if he'd sent
down for a spanner and forgotten all about it. I said, "Anyway, I was told
to come here, 25 shillings a week." "Yes," he said, "I think that's right."
Then he looked me up and down like I was a horse and said, "There's not
much of you, is there? Are you strong?" "Yes," I said, And so he said, "Well,
don't just stand there. Knock on these bags."
  He had twenty bags of wheat on the back of his truck. I had to lift each
one down and place it on the scales. The agent would weigh it, then his
man, the Lumper, would take it and stack it on the pile while I fetched
another. Well, I'm no weakling, but I was fair done in by the time I'd lifted
those twenty bags. They weren't that heavy - around 180 lbs, most of them
- but they were awkward. And I had my good clothes on. When I had finished,
Johnson got a couple of bag hooks from the front of the truck and threw
them to me.

