Tottie Tippett By Barbara Hanrahan  

SHE USED to dream she could fly like an angel, but she didn't know where
she wanted to fly to. She just had to use her hands and go, but she always
woke up before she left the ground (if you flew that'd be the end of you).
Riding was the nearest thing to flying - the faster the pony went the happier
she was; the harder she rode the better she liked it. Though once she had
a nasty buster on Maud when she came back from the Ardrossan Post Office
with the letters; and she rode Ruby, the cream pony, when she brought the
cows in and stayed on her back when she opened the gates and once she fell
off and skinned all her knees. When she rode the ponies on the cliffs they'd
go down the steep path by Mallee Creek to the beach, and she'd really have
to hang on. Riding, she never had any fear. Then, she had confidence in
herself and everything, she always had an idea that God was going to look
after her. But she was frightened of the sea and couldn't swim. The seas
round that part of the Peninsula were so rough that when you looked out
from the front door of the house, one minute you could see the steamer from
Port Adelaide making for the jetty, then the next it'd be hidden by the
waves.
  Her father had helped put the new piles in the jetty and the first thing
she remembered was walking down there with his dinner on a plate, wrapped
in a teatowel to keep it warm. She was only four then, and when she was
six Queen Victoria died, and the next year it was the earthquake and her
mother knelt down in the front room and prayed they'd be saved. And that
year, 1902, was when her father got smoker's cancer on his lip. He was a
fine looking man, clean-shaven, who never hit her but he'd sometimes tell
her to get out of the road. Towards the end they had to syringe the food
into him and he only had half a face. Her mother was changing the bed when
he lay back on the pillow and died.
  Because he'd been born in Germany their surname sounded like the dirty
word. Her mother was that angry when the Aldridges said their name the bad
way - but Mother couldn't write; it'd been Father who'd written all their
names in the big German Bible that was kept in the front room cupboard.
Her name was written in as Ernestina Louisa, but they called her Tottie,
and sixteen brothers and sisters came before her. Her sisters were Emma,
Lizzie, Elsie, Clara, Rosie, Winnie, Gertie, Hilda; two of her brothers
had died as infants of convulsions, then there was Herb, Arthur, Dick, Jack,
Bill and Tom.
  Some of them had married and moved away years ago, so Tottie didn't know
them. Arthur drove the coach from Ardrossan to South Hummocks before he
went to live with Elsie, who'd married a fellow from Yongala where the
cauliflowers weighed twelve pounds each and foxes bit out the lamb's tongues.
Tom was the only one in the family who had a big nose and Bill had lovely
curly hair. Jack worked at the butcher's in Ardrossan and his wife made
a gallon of soup at a time and it was that thin you didn't know whether
you were having soup or water. When Dick shifted to Adelaide his wife took
to the drink and one day when he came home from work all the furniture was
gone (she'd sold it for booze). Winnie and Gertie were the ones who'd nursed
Father and then they went up to Maitland as housemaids, to work off the
debt to the doctors. Hilda was very dainty and thought she was a bit above
everybody else. Rosie got struck by lightning - Mother put her to bed but
in the morning she was dead. Clara's husband was a fisherman at Port Wakefield,
where there were picture shows and Japanese wrestling tournaments and a
circus; after Clara died he still sent a box of fish over now and then,
and it was always Tottie's job to clean them.
  Over at Kadina a fellow had six or seven girls in the family way, and
Mother was horrified at girls wandering. She whipped Hilda with a piece
of rope tied to a stick when she sneaked down to the town one evening. `Your
body is your own,' she'd say. `Don't let anybody interfere with it.' She'd
married Father when she was fifteen; they'd come to Ardrossan when the country
was all mallee scrub, tea-tree and kangaroo bush, and lived in a hole in
the ground before they built the house. After he died, she took the steamer
to Adelaide to see a Chinese doctor and then she married Andy Yates, the
carrier. Andy had been bitten by a snake when he reached into a burrow to
grab a rabbit (he killed it, then put his finger on a plough wheel and cut
it off with a blunt tomahawk). He was a small man, gingerish, and Mother
was boss. The ponies were always sweaty after Andy had been riding them
(he had to keep riding all day to see the cows didn't get to the wild onion
weed that went straight to their milk) - sometimes when Tottie rode Ruby
to bring the cows in, Ruby was so sweaty that the saddle slipped round and
off she'd come. Tottie walked in her sleep. She'd fetch the milk-can, then
put it down beside her mother and Andy's bed and get in with them.
  As well as the cows they had pigs and sheep, hens and geese and a bit
of wheat. When the geese were sitting, they pecked at Tottie and chased
her. She stuck a big thick goose's quill through a cork in a bottle of milk
to bottle-feed her pet lamb. She loved him but he grew fatter and fatter,
and one day she came home from school to find that Andy had killed him -
he was hanging in the meat house, cut up. Tottie hated Andy then, but she
still ate the lamb chops for tea.
  A sailor gave Jack a monkey. Monkeys were dirty little beggars and Mother
made Tottie and Hilda stay inside when he sat on the underground tank stand
and fiddled with himself. Monk was a curiosity in the district, he used
to get up to some tricks. He walked along the telegraph wires and followed
Tottie to school. Once he got down the chimney of old lady Aldridge's bakehouse
and threw the dough that was rising over the walls. He kept going off to
the rubbish dump but got tangled up in some wire and they found him there,
dead.
  There was no money to splash round, they couldn't even afford a headstone
for Father's grave. But the front room had boards on the floor, not dirt
like the other rooms, and at Christmas there were cherries to eat. Mother
had a china ornament in the shape of a hen sitting on a china nest and she
made wonderful dampers that tasted better than bread. Mother had nice skin,
no pimples or anything; she dressed up in leg-of-mutton sleeves and a hat
with a feather and one Sunday she went to the Methodist Church, the next
to the Church of England, but she had a bit of Catholic in her somewhere.
Old Mrs Wundersitz visited Ardrossan twice a week from Maitland to meet
the steamer and get her vegetables, and as soon as her one-horse van came
into sight, the kettle would be put on. When the Afghan hawker came walking
round with his big white bag on his back full of sheets and pillowslips,
laces and ribbons, he always stayed in the wash-house overnight, and Mother
would never have a word out of place said to him (he was a neat old man
with a turban who cleaned his teeth with a stick off a gum tree and his
teeth were as white as snow). She was kind to anybody who passed the house,
swaggies and all.
  Ardrossan was a little town famous for its cliffs and farm implement factory
where Mr Smith had perfected his stump-jump plough, the Vixen. And Mr Cane
was the butcher, Mr Polkinghorne the baker, Mrs Huckvale had the hotel;
and Barton's, opposite the Institute and Post Office, sold groceries,
ironmongery, furniture, drapery and clothing, boots and shoes, and patent
medicines; and Tiddy's was another shop to sell all sorts, and the early
settlers had carted water from Tiddy Widdy Wells. There was a Vigilance
Committee, a brass band, and the football club's first uniforms were made
out of sugar bags dyed blue and white. In summer, when the tide was out,
boys dived off the ketches Stormbird and Crest of the Wave to have a swim;
and every New-year's day, past inhabitants of the district came back to
Ardrossan on the steamer and there was a picnic on the beach (the only thing
that spoilt the beach was that the tide fretted the cliff away and they
got a dirty sand).
  Mr Ryan was the schoolmaster and you were in awful trouble if you copied,
but Tottie never needed to because she was a clever scholar; she liked
arithmetic and reading and was a very good writer. She sat next to her best
friend, Lily Slaughter, whose mother was half an Aborigine, but only one
of the Slaughters had turned out really black - they called him Israel,
he ran the hand truck up and down the jetty to load goods on to the steamer.
Annie Evans sat in the seat in front; she had a lot of hair and was one
of the certain kind of people who bred lice. One day Tottie's head felt
itchy so she got straight on to the fine-tooth comb and found a couple of
big ones. She had a beautiful head of hair and was scared stiff; she rubbed
kerosene into her scalp, just to be sure, and made it all red and itchy.
  When Tottie left school at thirteen, she wanted to be a dressmaker and
she dreamt of a dress of heliotrope cotton voile with a six-gored skirt,
a blouse of Peking messaline, a coat with a suggestion of the Russian mode.
But Mother wouldn't let her use the sewing-machine so she had to watch for
her chance - they were down with the cows and the needle went through her
finger and she worked the machine till she got it out and never ever told
a soul. When she learnt to sew she made dresses for her mother and she had
a wonderful eye for measurement, but mostly she milked the cows and drove
the dog cart into Ardrossan to sell milk from a five gallon container with
a tap on it; and she sold eggs and did Mrs Tiddy's washing. Tottie's ambition
was to always go on working.
  The evangelist came to church and told about scarlet and crimson as indicating
shades of guilt in the same kind of sin - murder would be a scarlet sin
if committed by a worldly person, but hatred would be a crimson stain (a
sin of deeper dye) if cherished by a child of God. Old Mr McGeoch, who was
a bit cranky and often called out in church, shouted that all mankind had
inherited sin-tainted blood from Father Adam; Tottie and Lily went forward
with the others who believed in the new age of Messiah's Kingdon and vowed
they'd never touch alcohol. A young man took Tottie home from church, but
when they were crossing the paddocks he put the hard word on her and tried
to have connections. Tottie yelled out and Andy Yates heard and the young
man ran away.

