By Robin Gregory  

  The bus drove through the quiet streets, unusually deserted. The sun shone
warmly through the windows. The wattles were just beginning to bloom with
the message that spring, at last, was spreading wings and would soon be
flourishing colour and warmth around the city. People at last coming out
of their huddles around fires and heaters into the open. Though this day
had not yet brought out many, except this tube filled with laughter, singing
and fervent yells. They felt the sunshine and lapped it up, they felt the
eagerness and sang out with it.
  All alighted, still gabbling away, drowning out the chirping of the
neighbourhood birds. Banners were dragged off the back of the bus, the
women melted together and quickly organized. Like actors they went about
their business, each with her own task, each part of the ensemble.
  Cheers and protests broke the leisurely atmosphere. They moved en masse
to the clinic where Julie had been refused. The front line stood on the
steps staring into the dark and empty interior and read, `Closed on Monday
12th'.
  "Fuck. How dare they!" screamed Julie and gradually the word was passed
down the line.
  Somebody laughed alone. They swore and mingled and hesitated.
  Rachael took control deftly and simply. As soon as she spoke the voices
dropped. In a voice just louder than a whisper she said, "I brought along
some spray cans. It's a bit dangerous in broad daylight, but if anyone's
willing we should do it now."
  The small crowd nodded enthusiastically, only a couple were hesitant.
After all they had made the effort, they may as well do something for their
trouble.
  There were few cars around, and while the majority kept watch, Julie,
Rachael and a couple of others filled the glass panels with graffiti.
  `THIS CLINIC DISCRIMINATES BECAUSE OF SEXUAL PREFERENCE.'
  `LESBIANS HAVE THE RIGHT TO ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION.'
  They drew numerous lesbian symbols on the glass.

  It was quite a sight to behold once they had finished with it. Only one
car had passed and the women held up their banners to hide the painters.
The women laughed and cheered when they had finished. They felt enthused
and ready for more of the same stuff. A splinter group disappeared with
the remaining cans while the rest rolled up the banners and trooped back
onto the bus. They would come again tomorrow, without Julie though, it would
be too dangerous after the writing on the wall.
  "Might be an idea if you vanished for a few days," Rachael suggested,
"I bet the pigs will be on to you quick smart."
  "I'm not worried," laughed Julie, "I don't mind going to court to prove
a point."
  "Don't be crazy Jules, you already owe them $500 from the last time. If
they catch up with you, you could be spending the next year in jail."
  Julie sighed. Rachael was always so sensible about these sorts of things,
it just pissed her off sometimes.
  "I'll see," was all she would commit herself to.
  Rachael returned to the office of the women's press called the Bronte
Sisters. She got caught up in discussions about the possibility of employing
a new worker. All the women there worked a great deal of overtime, but
they weren't certain the budget would support another member of staff. Women
were always dropping in for a chat too, and Rachael spent most of the afternoon
with a member of an incest group discussing the printing of a sticker, its
format, cost and amount. Each worker had a broad role and each was involved
in many of the processes of printing. The buzz never stopped until about
five, so Rachael stayed back, finally able to concentrate her energies.
All the others had left by six and she was left in the peace and quiet of
the large office, solitary at her small laminated table with a lamp her
only companion.
  All the anger and hurt she had experienced gave her power which drove
itself onto paper. After an hour and a half she re-read her essay.
  `Wimmin have been held in the pope's hand for centuries. Now is the moment
to break free - to destroy the illusion of his powerfulness and
self-righteousness.
  `Wimmin have been forced into submission through catholicism and been
abused by its system. For centuries men have decided the fate of wimmin
according to their desires. Wimmin exist merely to serve. This is evident
in the marriage ceremony when the bride says she will obey her husband,
making her the slave and the man the master. This agreement implicitly allows
a man to use any means to obtain discipline, for discipline requires
punishment. Since no rules are written regarding this, it is up to the
discretion of the master to use what means he sees fit or merely what he
feels like doing, whether that is rape, bashing or anything else.
  `The ten commandments do not contain any creed to which men are answerable
for their crimes against wimmin, or their children for that matter. `THOU
SHALT NOT RAPE' is noticeably lacking from the laws. `THOU SHALT RESPECT
THY WIFE AND CHILDREN' is nowhere to be seen. The whole bible is oriented
to men's interests, not to the welfare of wimmin and children.
  `Wimmin are used as objects who bear children and gratify men's imagined
sexual needs. Their other purpose is to work for their own salvation and
that of men's. For wimmin are seen as the evil-doers, while men are led
into sin by them. Men take no responsibility for their actions. If a man
committs adultery it is because his wife has not served him well
enough and the other womyn seduced him. Men are innocent and wimmin are
either saints or sinners.
  `Catholicism has always ignored wimmin. It has been led by `celibate'
men who have no interest in or contact with wimmin. All through the ages
popes have not noticed how wimmin have struggled to survive and feed their
children. The pope of today still chooses to ignore. The pope with luxuries
enough to feed the starving wimmin and children of the world, must be made
accountable for his crimes against wimmin. We must use every bone in our
bodies to crush him, every strategy to rid the world of the oppression of
catholicism.
  `Now more than ever it is imperative that we attack religions and their
control over wimmin. The right-wing backlash is coming on strong, they are
getting more organized by the minute. They are an extremely powerful force.
We must present an equally, if not stronger group and fight back.
  `Especially at this time when wimmin are discovering their own spiritually,
their own religions, it is too easy to forget the rest of the world and
leave the fight. Do not forget all the wimmin in all countries who are brutally
oppressed. Catholicism, which is so much a part of our culture and our country,
still has as much power over wimmin as it did centuries ago. Remember those
wimmin and join us in the march to end catholicism.
  `Wimmin demand the right to control their bodies and to make choices
about their lives and those of their children.'
  Rachael leant back. It would need more work, but at least she had the
framework now. The hardness in her face, the tight mouth were as tenacious
as ever; the fight continued. Even in her sleep her face gave her no rest,
she lived with and through those lines.
  Rachael stood and stretched. The office was so silent a shiver travelled
up her back. Scowling, she told herself she was afraid of nothing. Still
the feeling remained and she made her way speedily out of the darkened
building, after pulling on her heavy black coat. She locked the building
and stood just outside. The air was good out here, it was too stuffy in
there.
  It was an easy walk to the cathedral from the Bronte Sisters. It was a
stunning building in Australian terms. The building of St. Patrick's began
in 1858 and was finally completed with the appearance of spires, on what
were previously gothic towers. They were noticeably an addition to the church
- white against the bluestone. Although by day the contrast seemed quite
clumsy, at night it gave the cathedral a mystical atmosphere. Those great
white spires rocketing away from the gloomy base.
  Inside, Rachael threw a cursory glance at the enormous ceiling with its
decorative timber beams. So much money, she thought, wasted on this pompous
church, paid for by those who could least afford it. And they were made
to believe it was the doorway to the after-life, that this was for the glory
of god, and bugger how hungry or cold they felt.
  The stained-glass windows were colourful and entrancing. Rachael walked
firmly down the aisle, scowling at the high altar and the side chapels 
with their dramatic representations. She tried a door marked `No Admittance',
it was locked hard.
  A praying man watched her, ready to jump up and intervene. He tried to
catch the woman's eye, but Rachael took no notice of him, as she dodged
in and out of the confession boxes. They reminded her of too much. That
dreadful memory that bit at her soul every so often. The time when her father
had left her and her mother. Rachael had hated him so much. She had dreams
about killing him, walking in on him in the middle of the night, while he
was asleep in bed, and stabbing him with the kitchen knife. Other times
she hoped that her mother would just leave him, that he would no longer
be around. She did not expect him just to up and walk out, that had never
been one of her fantasies, but still she was sure she was to blame. God
knows all! How many times had that been drummed into her? When her father
had gone, and her mother was distraught, Rachael knew she was to blame.
She knew that god had punished her for thinking such wicked thoughts. She
had to confess. Afterwards she wished she never had. The priest agreed it
was her fault, obviously she had made her father feel how unwanted he was,
and she had destroyed her mother's life. The guilt she had felt was immense.
She prayed and prayed for forgiveness, cried herself to sleep every night,
even asked for his return, so that the ache in her brain would leave her
alone. Better to live with him and the fights with her mother than suffer
this agony. He never came back though.
  Outside, Rachael trode heavily around the cathedral, trying different
doors, none of which were open. She walked around the block a few times,
checking out all the buildings.
  On her third time around, the tall woman stopped at the Victorian Artists'
Society which was across the road from St. Patrick's. It was a
two-storey building where the conservative artists in Melbourne 
exhibited their pro-establishment work.
  "I wonder if Julie has been here?" said Rachael to the door. She studied
it carefully and then turned to the cathedral from its step. From there
she gained a view of the west doorway. The doorway where priests would come
and go. Ten minutes passed and still the woman in black stood transfixed.
  After yet another trip around the cathedral, into gardens, up steps and
back at the Artists' Society she finally nodded and headed past the towering
edifice towards the city. She passed a nun, who had a familiar face. Rachael
recalled the nun she'd had as a teacher in primary school, whose face reminded
her of a crow, wizened and hard. She had a sharp face, like this one and
the same beady dark eyes. Sitting in English classes and being whacked over
the knuckles with a thick steel ruler, for not spelling all her words
correctly. She could never do her tables either, and the fury of Sister
Angelina would fall upon her for that too.

