A journey By Suzanne Edgar  

The four-wheel drive carries the watchers through lemony evening light towards
the heart of the country where the green flames of little pines leap from
blond grass. Netta wants to arrest the steel cocoon; or force a window and
fly back to the red gums sculpturing the river banks, their gnarled fist
roots clutching soil sucked by the hungry Lachlan.
  At last they make camp and Netta, anxious to be helpful, takes a bucket
and stumbles into a lagoon. She emerges calmer, but slopping her water a
little. After dark they cradle full stomachs around the fire while Alex,
the leader, plucks songs from his guitar. Netta and the German girl Irmgard
stay up late, talking of why they've come; a half moon paints white slats
between the trees. In the morning dry light and space shimmer into Netta's
head and push away depression and doubt.
  Driving again, she dozes, chin lounging against the seat belt, and wakes
remembering her friends in the cafe, herself on the defensive.
  "Why's a townie like you going racing across the country with a mob of
bushies? You won't see much from the inside of a bloody great van," John
said.
  "You should take a fly net," Delia warned.
  "Where on earth do you buy those?"
  "Netta you're so impractical. I'll lend you one."
  Lal yelled from the machine where she was yanking levers to make cappuccino.
"You mightn't get on with the rest of the group. They won't be like your
gallery tour types."
  "That's a risk, but I'm hoping to meet some Aborigines up north. We'll
be at Yowah and Eulo for two weeks."
  "Woolly-minded liberal travels north to ease guilt!" John mocked. Anger
tightened through Netta's chest.
  Now she swats at flies sipping a bead of sweat in a hollow above her lips,
and looks out at glowing red earth stippled with yellow flowers. Netta's
thighs and the bench are sealed with sweat; a stubble sandpapers her legs.
  Why had she been so disorganised when it came to getting away? Even at
the clinic; Dr Moore had been irritated about the accounts she wouldn't
get finished.
  "Where's the bloody McCormack file?" he'd screamed - in front of the courier.
Netta stared into the filing cabinet. After the sniggering youth had gone
the boss nudged her.
  "Sorry Net. Have you found it?" Passing the file, their hands grazed.
He watched her affectionately and Netta trembled.
  "Wouldn't it be better to travel with friends, rather than total strangers?
It might be strenuous, you're not getting any younger old girl."
  How answer that there was no-one to go with? How say, I don't have holidays
because in that hotel on Fraser Island I barely spoke to a soul. Or, cocktails
and dinner in the revolving tower just aren't available to me.
  "I'd like some adventure, you never know what I might find out there.
Who I might meet. And I find nature ... refreshing. Your style of thing,
with boats and booze and teenagers all over the place doesn't really appeal."
That shut him up.
  But how would she manage in a tent with strangers? It was difficult to
sleep in her own flat. Perhaps the others would be tight little couples,
with smug wives boring on about children and extensions.
  Anything would be better than this dreary business, dwindling as the suburb
aged and people died. Last winter, in between patients, she'd knitted the
boss a jumper. She loved to see the soft wool, turned in her hands, wrapped
around his throat. Moore himself was concerned. He might move to a busier
partnership, or retire early. She needed to look for something else, but
put it off.
  At Yowah, Netta and Irmgard put up their tent where wild hops spurt among
the rocks. Netta finds a trail of glass and opal chips near a bower bird's
shrine. She brings out her hat decorated with silk poppies and Delia's net
fits around the crown.
  Burnt orange distance is a magnet and one morning Netta sets out on her
own. One can't get lost with one's feet on a track, she tells herself; Mulga
trees wind like ghosts of people the land once owned. Ahead, two great brolgas
appear, heads lifted to catch her slight scent and sound. She watches the
birds who move in a tantalising rhythm; dissolving in the haze when she
approaches; still and silver if she waits. Netta leaves her little drab
self scuttling along with shoulder bag, hat, and googly-eyed field glasses
and merges with the high-stepping birds.
  They lead her to a pool covered with tiny flowers where a small bird stalks
on stilts, darting at insects and staring into the water. A narcissus bird.
Netta flicks back the fly net and looks down at her own face, askew in the
brownish mirror, with circle of straw for frame and dark hair greeting its
image: a closed, self-contained look. Not so assured as the brolgas; more
like this solitary dot of a bird who makes do with very little, unperturbed
by an intruder kneeling in the clay. 
  Netta strips and wades in, splashing water over her arms and sinking a
little in oozing mud. Then she shoves her underwear in the bag, replacing
only her blouse and skirt. A change in the light switches her back to time
and other people's expectations; she heads for Yowah. Silky red powder silts
up the hairs along her toes and blows round her calves. Striking sharp chips
of fluted rock, Aboriginal flints, she selects one for a talisman.
  Eulo is a pub and a thickening of weatherboard houses beside the road.
One morning a voice in a megaphone swings through the bush to Netta and
Irmgard scraping eggs from frying pans.
  "Welcome ladies and gents to the World Championship Lizard Races get down
here early you've got to be in it to win it so place your bets on one of
our thoroughbred lizards assembled here from studs all over the south-west,
enter the log chopping and ladies' tug-of-war chicken wheels and steak
sandwiches refreshments no limit." Netta shudders.
  But Irmgard is keen. "Let us go Netta? We haf come all this way, we should
at least look. Also, some postcards I must buy."
  "I hate crowds, and the noise! It's bad enough from here. Besides, I've
got no clean clothes."
  "We can go to the river and wash our shorts. They will dry so very fast
in this heat."
  "Couldn't you go with Alex and the others?"
  "They are gone already. Come please Netta?"
  "All right, but I'm not staying long, I hate drinking in the middle of
the day in weather like this."
  Blacks, oil drillers, cattle men in tough hats and boots, out-of-towners
mill about the pub, and the verandah overflows with men lifting stubbies
to cracked lips. In the beer garden raw Queensland rump sizzles on barbecues
and the megaphone belts out starting times. Packs of men hunt together,
while babies crawl like blowies over their sprawling, slack-bellied mothers.
Netta's glad of her net and grins at a blonde teetering by on stiletto heels,
slapping herself.
  "You've got the right idea love. Next year I'm gunna come up here with
a truckload a them things to sell. Reckon you'd make a killing."
  "Maybe I'll do that myself."
  "Is that right? Well good on ya."
  Netta lets herself surge with the crowd. At the log chopping, bronze giants
in navy singlets hose down the arena and a sweet smell of soil and sawdust
rises. Irmgard has disappeared. After the lizard races, Netta heads for
a gin and tonic. A black woman sitting on the kerb catches her eye and waves
her over. They talk: Minnie Stevens, her niece Riena, and Netta the southerner.
  "You like me sing you corroboree? I sing you magic, woman's magic. Only
for woman." Netta sits on the grass.
  When Minnie sings her body sways and her eyes snap and glitter. Weaving
a high-pitched tune with voice and flowing hands, she seems to conjure powerful
rites; though Netta doesn't properly understand. The three women are in
a world apart, beside the old red road, beside the pub. Afterwards Netta
can never recall Minnie's face, so dominant are her black, conspiratorial
eyes. Deep, yellow-black eyes. The singing slows to a wail.
  "Let's have another drink Netta, you buy me a beer eh? Then I sing you
more songs." Netta brings a row of frosted cans.
  "Thanks darlin. Now I make you special love magic, get you boyfriends,
many boyfriends. I make you boyfriend stay only with you, never look at
other woman, come back you always even from far away place."
  Netta flushes behind her net. What boyfriend? "All right," she says, "but
you'll need pretty strong magic."
  "No? Doan tell me that. You beautiful woman, lovely hair", she reaches
out and strokes Netta's hair. "I get you much power, sing a rainbow roun
your face."
  The singing begins again. Each incantation ends with a strange
upward-twirling trill. Only this time the hands thread the air about Netta's
bare thighs, flit before her breasts. Dabs of spit are anointed, "ptht ptht",
on her cheeks, inside her knees, along her arms.
  "How old you are darlin?"
  "Forty."
  "No, that carn be true. You doan look it, same as me! You an me can be
good friends, we understand many things these young ones carn't, tee hee."
Minnie nudges Netta and winks to exclude Riena and also Irmgard listening,
intrigued but cautious, on the edge.
  "I love you darlin," Minnie hugs Netta. "You come to the toilet with me
eh?" Minnie gets up and hitches her dress with the faded pink roses. They
link arms for a journey to the ladies and gents leaning under a peppercorn.
Flies cluster on scraps of stained lavatory paper and it stinks of urine
spilled wide of the mark. Queuing for a squat over the pit, Min announces
Netta is with her. When they return, a young man is lowering himself on
to his haunches beside Riena.
  "Luke! Lukey, where you bin all this time? Haven been to see your old
auntie for months. Netta, this my nephew Luke. Luke meet my frien Netta.
She's from Canberra, can you believe it?"
  "Hello Luke."
  "Hi. Pleased to meet you, staying up here long?"
  "Only a week, worse luck."
  "I bin singin her magic, she's very powerful woman. You still got that
shirt I fix for you Luke? You doan wash it, do nothin to spoil its power
like I tole you, no dry cleaning?"
  "No no auntie, don't worry, it's in my cupboard. You don't go along with
this stuff do you Netta?"
  "Oh yes I do."
  "Go on, I bet you don't; white people never do, they think it's rubbish."
Luke is a little embarrassed by his Aunt Min and toothless Riena, as one
is at twenty, imagining he sees them through this stranger's eyes. But Netta
can't emphasise her belief enough.
  "I don't think it's rubbish," she says urgently.
  "I don't believe you."
  "But you must, it's true; I do believe, and I respect your aunt." For
some reason she cares intensely how Luke judges her. He wears a neat shirt
and shorts, a bush hat is pushed back over dark, curling hair; his eyes
are aquamarine. Black-fringed eyes in a golden face, searching hers, relenting.
  "Come up for the races did you?"
  "Yes, partly."
  "What do you think of Eulo?"
  "I love it."
  "He's a good boy, my sister's boy, you like im Netta?" Minnie turns away
to hector Riena, who has lit a cigarette, and Luke drops to one knee, hesitant.
  "Would you ... would you let me kiss you?" A rope in Netta's chest loosens
and drops. She looks around, sees the Mechanics' Institute with its banner
flapping over the porch: Disco Dance Sat 28th. Eyes plead.
  "I suppose I would, if you really want to."
  Luke removes his hat and leans forward. 

