Fugue on forty By Sara Dowse 1 The man I am leaving has pale hair but interesting eyes. The kind that turn
green with yellows, browns or greens, and stay fixed a dazzling blue with
blue, like the sea on a bright spring day. They seem small, close together
when he's tired, as though he hasn't the strength to hold them in place.
Away from me, they are wide-spaced and large. Happy, innocent eyes. (I have
seen them at parties.)
  We fight, unhealthily. Crazy maelstroms that suck us in and blow us about
and leave the waters clotted with hatred and suspicion.
  I rarely sleep.

 2   The man of my dreams has a pleasant, handsome face. Smooth in the centre,
hard at the edge. Warm brown eyes - no ambivalence there. Ruddy beige of
face. Curly black hair. A welcoming smile.
  He says he remembers me.
  I wonder.

 1   Astigmatic, he sometimes shields his eyes with glasses. Heavy black rims on
his wide, long face. They accentuate a rabbit look in him. He suffers from
hay fever, wriggles his nose to keep them in place. When he wears them he
looks cold, professional. Yet one is conscious of a disguise.

 2   He says he will ring me. I admire his clothes. Caramel-coloured, to go
with his face. He is an artist as I am. A musician. Baroque. We have friends
in common. He will be coming to Canberra and will look me up. Pink and
plump. A picture of health. He might fit well in Canberra.

 1   Our connections are crossed with brambles. His naked eye is a thistle. When
we fight it's often because I wish it to end, or for there to be a sudden
awakening, a realisation of love, a discovery, like the bright infant,
floating pure and innocent through the bulrushes.
  We fornicate, through this. Often quickly, but if he is angry, long and
hard. I want love. He needs release.
  I lie underneath.

 2   Waiting for his arrival. It is a secret, his presence, all that's
inviolable in me. He is zabaglione, sweet with civilisation. I want the
pleasure to last, of knowing he'll be here. In the same city. Accessible.

 1   His arms are leaden weights around me. He tries to comfort though it pains
him. We are at truce, he brings me cups of tea. In the evening, by the
window flushed with cascading autumn foliage, he takes sullen sips of wine.
I cry from wounds the steaming tannin scours.

 2   His viola is often with me. Light, insouciantly decadent, it trickles
through me, pouring out in a smile. In the sleepless hours, the suburban
hum of fridge and motor car smooth as nocturnal surf in my ear, I open the
case. Black leather frayed near the catch. Inside, the worn red felt. I play
a ponderous cello.

 1   I am suspicious. He must loathe me. And I loathe his pale fire, a dry ice
that burns at a touch. I withdraw, determined to find a meaning outside
him. So, he has found another! I will too.

 2   The tan bark outside Llewellyn Hall is slick and sharp underfoot. Tiny
native plants bend with the driving rain; the giant concrete walls are
streaked and steaming. The lights within glow as from a royal cave. I
imagine him by my side, discoursing on Telemann, Monteverdi, opera buffa.
  I breathe in the warmth from a damp wool coat. Giddy, I climb to the top
of the gallery, where seats are cheap and sound is best.

 1   He wants to split, he says. We stand at the window, bleak of foliage; winter
lights and winter stars dazzling shards on a void. I nod, realising it is
so. The tears dry on my cheek, salt sharp. Suddenly he looks so beautiful
and sad to me.

 2   I say to myself, why wait? Life if short should be sweet. I think of
brandy and pheasant as I reach for the phone, marvel at my luck when he
answers it. Then flounder, with nothing to say. He apologises for not
ringing. He has been sick, he says. He, sick? Embarrassed, I wish he hadn't
bothered to make excuses. I tell him I've rung to ask when he's going to
play. A pause. He clears his throat. "I may not be able. This sickness. Last
year I had hepatitis ... I think it's a relapse."
  "Oh, I'm sorry," I say, suppressing my anger with him for lying.

 1/3  The kilos shed off me. My life, it seems, has shrunken to this room
with its looming wardrobe and cereal stickers on the back of the door. And
cut-outs of Gonza and Alfred E Neuman. The room of a son of a friend. I
keep the transistor low so as not to wake her through the gyprock wall. I
try yoga, meditation, masturbation, valerian tea. At last, when dawn comes
the outline of a pagoda tree stark against an opal sky, I find a kind of
peace: the locked case propped against the wardrobe and me lying stunned on
the bed.

 2   We make arrangements for dinner. "I'm almost recovered,' he says.

 1   I pursue life, what it is to be human, mature, without ties or
responsibilities other than those I choose. I am determined. I am free now,
my friends tell me. So does he, when he condescends to meet. We are friends
now, he tells me. "Now we can fuck, without the hassles." He has a point,
and I give in. I go to films, meetings, dinner parties, pubs, concerts,
art shows. Alone. The nights are filled with sharp adult voices, warm wine
and frost. I must be determined, to brave the frost. By ten o'clock in the
evening, before the movie ends or the last cup of coffee is drunk, car
windows front and back coat with a thick crust of ice. On saying goodbye
the host hands you a bucket or saucepan of hot water. If you go to the
movies, you cover the windscreen with newspaper.

 2   I rehearse our conversation. I am teaching more than playing, that is
true, but I still have ideas about the instrument and have begun to rough
out some compositions. The students practise on them. The students like
them, and I feel guilty, because I am jealous of their playing. I would like
to be playing instead of teaching. He has no need to teach, or if he does,
only occasionally. His music, lilting, almost pastoral in effect, begins to
sound shallow. I wonder if he is fussy about his socks. 

 1   Midnight, maybe after, I leave the fire and the company and wind on my
scarf and tug on my gloves and march into the darkness with a potful of
boiling water. The frost melts in widening circles like portholes on the
glass, then slides in great drops on and under the bonnet. I jump in and
start the car, bless the heat from the engine. A quick goodnight from my
hosts and they rush inside with the empty saucepan and out of the cold.
Within blocks the water on the windscreen has frozen. A sheet of opaque ice,
pearled as the dawn. I stop the car, leave the engine running, leap out to
crack the ice with my fists. It splinters, that's all. I climb behind the
wheel and drive with my head out the window.
  Dangerous driving this way. I turn a corner and find I'm in his street.
Moving on, thinking I am crazy, and hateful, for spying on him like this.
But, mercifully, no unfamiliar cars stand in front. And now I am here, it
would be spying if I didn't enter. My house, not long ago.
  The side door is open, not even latched. As though in the kernel of the
cold dark night he is waiting. The glass panels sweat. A light burns in the
kitchen. Something propels me now, a sudden swelling of obsession takes
over from the first frosty steps, whether anger or desire or both. The bare
bulb in the kitchen kindles beads of light on the frozen glass, gilds the
wrinkled leaves of the African violet he has neglected to water. And on the
table, two crystal glasses, a gift from me. And next to one, a woman's bag,
the colour of wine.

 2   The melody is fading.

 3   She takes me in her bed, a foam rubber mattress shoved against the
cupboard. I cry: she holds me in her arms. "He isn't worth it," she says,
crooning it to me. "Am I brilliant?" I ask, stripped utterly bare, thinking
of the crumbling black leather, worn red lining, voluptuous cello standing
patient in the room next door. "No," she answers, with piercing clarity,
"not brilliant."
  She pauses to reflect. "Creative."
  She falls asleep, spreadwing over the mattress. I climb over her legs,
holding onto the cupboard, careful not to disturb her. In the room vacated
by her son I watch the parched bones of the pagoda tree darken against the
morning sky.
  At breakfast she expounds. Already, so young, her face is hardened about
the jaw, and then I remember she isn't young, I'm not young, though we have
started life anew, and that line of resolve round her chin would be scarcely
noticeable in a face whose flesh was firm. She butters toast. "It's their
fucking negativity. That's what nearly finished me off," she confides. "I
would say to him, every fucking week when you think of it (she laughs)
`look, do you love me, should we go on like this?' And the bugger would
never tell me, one way or another." She lays her knife on the side of the
plate after cutting the toast in four neat squares. "They want us to make
all the decisions for them."

 2   I ring to postpone the dinner. "No, I'm not well," I say. "Nasty winter
flu," I tell him. He laughs. "When you're better we'll have a nice quiet time.
Two convalescents together".

 1   "You don't have to talk to him," she says.
  He stands flooded in winter sunlight at the door. I see him as though from
the end of a telescope, as though contemplating a star. His hair, yellower
than I remember, floats from his skull like the ruffled hair of a waking
child, the prototype of haloes.
  "I'm sorry," he says, but doesn't move.
  I feel myself hurtle down the hallway, head down, arms flapping at my side,
some burrowing animal groping towards the sun. I cry and he soothes me with
caresses and I wonder whether it will be right again but I cannot take his
caresses and I want it to stop.

 3   "You have to find a centre," she says. "Something inside yourself." I
agree, weaving her words in the concrete cubicle through the student's
rasping chords. The sound quivers and finally disappears, rising high to the
acoustical ceiling to hover in the air. The student flattens her back
against the chair, the bow loose in her hand, leaning on the cello. "You
okay, Maria?" The student loves me, mistakenly. I smile, heedless of tears.
Gingerly she raises the bow and plays on.
  "You know what happened to me." My friend states this, but it is a question.
She expects me to know yet wants to repeat it. Her sharp voice is quavering,
reminding me of the chin. She drinks milk coffee. "Let me tell you." How she
had left him, finally, because he wouldn't tell her to. And suddenly
everything was light and empty: "I had this peculiar sensation, like I was
skiing, so fucking fast I wouldn't be able to stop. And the wind was cutting
right through me." She drank a lot, sobered herself up with Panadols and
fucked a lot, with anyone willing. She smiles. "It helped." But then she
found a protector, a friend. He drank with her, the days ran into nights and
into days again and she knew it was morning only when it was time to take
another Panadol.

