<sample>
	<id> W15 </id>
	


	<note> 2027 words </note>
	


	<source> Sibyl's stories </source>
	


	<bl> By Carolyn van Langenberg </bl>
	


	<h> The Girl in the Pink Swimsuit </h>
	

          
	<h> I </h>
	

    Above the dunes rose Sibyl, head bent, listening, to the squeak her
feet made as her toes poked into and her heels pressed heavily on sand.
She tossed and leaped at the sky, curled over, inspecting vines and flowers
and silver green tussocks.  A crab scuttled over her feet and she pounced
on it, smiling as she turned it loose.
    Suddenly she stood still, her straight sharp body alone on the most
prominent and high jutt of the dunes.  The beach behind her grandfather's
house glittered, the royal blue sea meeting the sky to mark the horizon,
an outcrop of rock at its centre, black and familiar.  A cloudless sky rolled
blue to blue, blueness breaking at the shoreline, the waves rushing greenly
over the white sand, sea washing in, drawing itself away, leaving behind
a trailing of pippies and periwinkles.
    Sibyl bounced on the dune, crashed to the beach in a pile of soft sand,
shrieking and laughing with the pleasure of breaking something.  Repeatedly
she ran up the sandy incline, stumbling, then leaped to the beach below,
repeatedly laughing as her body jerked and thrust into the giving sand.
Her hair, black and short, flicked with sand into her mouth.  Sand coloured
limbs no longer pointed awkward to the sky.  She sprang to her feet and
strode, caught at tussocks and straying roots, fell back and, breathless,
deftly forced footholds.  Without pausing, she jumped, rolled and laughed,
cascaded with loose sand to her cushion of sand, onto the beach again.
    Over the dunes, following a well-trodden track through straggled banksia,
sharp edged grasses and broken bottles, the rest of the family padded -
mother, father and three small children.  They emerged complacently from
a valley onto the flat beach, and settled where the sand was soft and white,
not nearer the tide-mark where it was harder and closer to beige.
    The girl ran to join them, leaving her broken down sand dune for the
habit of their company.
    Sibyl turned ten that day, and her family gave her a swimsuit, her mother
exercising the authority to select for the girl a pink costume which puffed
over her slender hips and gathered into a rush between the expected breasts
down the centre bone to her waist.  Pink and red buds spread from the
gathering.  The puffed out pants section was plain pastel pink.
    Sibyl loved the costume.  Her mother always said pink suited her so
well, blending with her pale skin and setting off her dark hair.  She glowed
with the compliments, stretched and peered into mirrors to reassure herself
of her image.  Her grandfather laughed at her coyness and said, `Quite nice,
eh?'  Sibyl knew they had little faith in her pale skin, her thin body.
    But today her swimsuit was new and she wore it with pride.  Her father
smiled encouragingly, loving the beauty of his young daughter.  He tousled
her hair playfully, joking at her prettiness.  She scowled and chased him
into the sea, laughing at the cold spray salting her mouth, flirting with
her body as he splashed her until she feigned a collapse into the foam,
shrieking, helpless in the water which pushed and sucked her to his legs.
The sea squirted up around his calves, shallower, shallower, fountaining
low at his ankles, his feet buried in sand.
    He played, teased her to follow him further into the sea, `See who can
swim the furthest!'
    `Oh, no!  That's too far out!'  Moaning at her poor abilities.  `I wish
I could but, gee, Dad, I just can't!'
    She ran in and out of the sea, watching pink legs turn green then white
under water, the pants of her swimsuit balloon, diving under waves, struggling
under swells, coming up, gulping, air, succeeding to withstand the surge
outwards.
    She ran up the beach, impatient with the sand sticking to her legs.
Her mother cursed the way she flicked water and shook her towel free of
sand, `Too close to the baby!  Sand in his eyes!'  Sibyl sat still for a
few moments, lolled luxuriously, sunbaked, because she was learning her
pink whiteness was not conventional beauty, despite her mother's suggestions.
She stretched in her wet clinging swimsuit.  She loved the way it moulded
like a second skin.  She loved the salt stickiness of her body, the salt
grains on her lips.  She loved the sun, warm on her shoulders, drying her
back.
    A cool breeze stirred, the blueness enveloped them and shadows reached
across the beach to the sea.  `C'mon!' barked the mother, `Time t'go...!
Gettin' cold!'  There was a crease between her two well shaped eyebrows.
They were black, but her hair, long and wound into a bun at the nape of
her neck, was a coarse hard grey.
    She snorted contempt, groused at Sibyl who tried to pull a shirt on
one of the small children.  Sibyl folded towels to pack in the bag.  Her
mother unravelled them, critical of the sand embedded in the compacted cotton,
and of the assumption that the towels should be put in the bag she would
carry.
    `Spect me to do it all! ... Ungrateful! ... That's what! ... You all
are!'
    The baby cried, sand in his eyes.
    And another child yelled.  A soldier crab had scurried over his toes.
    Sibyl glanced at the sea, and sighed.  Pushed sandals into her mother's
bag.
    Her father slowly wiped himself dry.  He pulled a shirt over his shoulders,
knotting the loose arms under his chin, watching the rocky outcrop on the
horizon, ignoring the small bustling around his feet.
    At a given signal, a jolt of an adult head or a throaty admission, the
family trouped towards the dunes where they disappeared and reappeared,
wending their way through valleys, up and down sandy slopes.  They walked
laboriously, led by the father and the girl in the pink swimsuit.  They
both carried towels over their shoulders.  Two small children, heads bowed,
tripped over tangling vines.  One fell, the sand pulling at her ankles.
The other bellowed fearfully and stopped.  An ant had run across his path.
The mother, coming behind him and struggling through the sand under the
weight of a bag and the burden of the baby, slapped him, ordering curtly
to get moving!
    The pound and the rush, and the pause of the sea.
    Sibyl could hear the waves break when she unlatched the gate to her
grandfather's garden.  She imagined the sea pulling, dragging over the sand
over the beach over the periwinkles, over the shells and the pebbles, pulling
back to a swell, and pounding the beach uproariously.  Again, and again,
and again.  The same rushing and scuttling backwards and breaking forwards,
she thought, I love it.
    She peeled off her swimsuit.  The crutch bagged with wet sand, grating
roughly the skin under the leg elastic.

                              
	<h> II </h>
	

  Everyone was consciously free out of school uniform.  The science teacher
allowed himself covert pleasure in chaperoning to a beach picnic at Byron
Bay so many indiscreetly clad thirteen and fourteen year old girls.  They
rolled their eyes indifferently, sportively, fetchingly, and sat in giggling
huddles at the front of the bus.  The boys guffawed and gestured meaningfully.
They crammed into the back of the bus.  They shouted and sang to each other.
  Satisfied the sexes were not too close to each other, the teacher drove
away in his car, alone.
  The bus accelerated, sped through the countryside.  Wind whipped hair
at the windows, whipped away snatches of pop songs they shouted for communal
approval.  The semi-tropical lushness, spilling over the roadway, blocking
vision at sharp bends, remained incidental, a beauty they took for granted.
They hallooed and booed, screamed at the speed with which a sharp s-bend
was taken and, further exhilarated by the smell of salt, they hurrahed their
way into the sleepy beach town.  People raised weary heads to scrutinise
yet another crowd of young ratbags shouting their way to the beach.  Yelling,
`Yah!' at the teacher.  `Beat yer!  Lose a tyre!?  Jeez, y`slow!'
  They parked at the main beach where new gaudy dwellings were under
construction.  An old brick kiosk at the centre of a bitumen turnabout had
its iron shutters closed.  Picnic sheds spread sedately under Norfolk pine
trees.  The sheds were cool, open on all sides to the breezes.
  Awkwardly, they waited for a signal from someone to tell them to bound
over the hot bitumen down the rocks to the sand, school obedience and group
control their familiar.  Pausing, huffing, pacing, biting lips, they queried
each other's intention.
  Something broke free.
  With one leap, they ran at the beach, squealing, flinging towels and
possessions in disordered heaps, falling over friends and gasping with
laughter, mouths full of sand, and some plunged into the surf.
  One red-haired boy hung back.  He quietly picked his way down the rocks.
He kept his shirt on.  He sat with the girls and began to cover his legs
thickly with cream.  Hesitantly, he looked back to the stuffy bus, the picnic
sheds, a place away from the sun.
  `I burn badly,' he muttered to Sibyl.
  She watched him screw up his face, his freckles moving funnily across
his nose. 
  `I went to hospital once.  With blisters. I was there for days!'
  Bluntly she suggested he should swim with his shirt on.
  `They'll laugh!' he moaned, indicating the other boys with a nod of his
head.  She shrugged.
  `Better than stewing on your own!'
  He agreed, staring at the bus buckling crazily within dancing waves of
reflected heat.  Stared over the inflamed rocks where dunes once rose
gracefully.  The rocks prevented the sand eroding from under the kiosk and
a few weatherboard cottages perched precariously along dunes ravaged by
tidal waves.  The newer shimmering holiday flats were apparently considered
safe behind the Norfolk pines.
  Sibyl spread her towel, adjusted her hat and sunglasses and commented,
`That house ... that one ... used to be further in!'  Her friend, Josephine,
sprawled on her towel, moved her lips, acknowledging someone had spoken.
Sibyl rubbed suncream on her shoulders and lay beside her, pushing the straw
hat down over her nose.
  `Are you girls swimming or not!' The teacher called in ringing classroom
tones.
  They giggled and protested, `We're baking!'
  Sibyl saw him, wet from swimming, through the slats of her straw hat.
He stopped at her feet.  His eyes followed the contours of her body, her
thin criticised body which she decided was svelte and fashionable.  She
watched his eyes undress her.  She responded by slightly raising her knee.
His eyes rested on pink clad hips.  She took off her hat.  In a voice she
thought engaging and mature, she asked if the water were cold.  He looked
at the face, at the eyes behind sunglasses.  He grinned at the face, at
the voice, at the pink swimsuit.  `Try it!,' he laughed, and looked up the
beach towards another group of his school kids teasing and pouring sand
over langourous girls, chasing them, squealing, into the sea.
  Sibyl stood and took off her sunglasses.  The sea was as always blue and
green, the sun yellow and sparkling on the restless water, white foaming
waves breaking, spreading, thinning thinning thinning in a race up the sand,
rushing rushing rushing back into another curling wave.  Forever moving,
ebbing, crashing, nervously under the sun, glittering, receding to the horizon,
black rocks at the centre.  She pushed a forefinger under the thick brinylon
elastic cloth of her costume, snapped the material down over her backside,
and walked demurely down to the tidemark.
  In the sea other classmates leapt and crouched, performing corroborees
with the mad roar and turbulence.  The teacher leapt at and chased one of
the girls who had a Saturday night boyfriend.  He picked her up and dropped
her, splashing dramatically.  She screamed and pleaded and gurgled, her
mouth full of salty water.  Spluttering and giggling, she tried to knock
him over, but he turned and pulled her legs over his shoulders, hoisting
her up, and piggy backed her up the beach where he threw her on soft sand.


</sample>
